  B.G. Galef, JR. 
  PART 1: A LITTLE HISTORY 

   We humans are profoundly social animals.  The biological success of our species - our numbers, our worldwide distribution - depends in no small measure on our ability to acquire behaviour socially: to use and, over generations, to improve upon one another's responses to environmental challenge.  Members of our species, however, are not unique in using the behaviour of others to guide their own responses to life's demands.  Like us, various insects, fishes, birds, and mammals can exploit the behaviour of conspecifics to bias their own behavioural development in adaptive directions. 

   We humans are, apparently, exceptional in our spontaneous use of arbitrary signs and symbols to communicate with our fellows.  We may well be unusual both in intentionally teaching others how to behave (Barnett, 1968; Ewer, 1969; Galef & Dalrymple, 1978) and in the extent to which we acquire motor skills by observing and then imitating our more accomplished fellows (Davis, 1973; Galef, 1988b; Roberts, 1941; Thorpe, 1963).  However, it is only recently that evidence supporting even these relatively simple statements about differences in the processes supporting social learning by members of our own and other species has become available.  For many decades, the processes used by animals and by humans to learn socially were assumed to be identical. 

   Did It All Begin With Gall?  

   Late in the first half of the 19th century, Franz Gall, father of phrenology, quoted with approval the following passage from the works of the French philosopher and naturalist Charles-George Leroy to show that animals (in this case foxes), like humans, used arbitrary sounds, "verbal language" (Gall, 1835, p.26), to communicate ideas and emotions: 

  It is certain from observation, that before having been able to instruct themselves by personal experience, the young foxes on leaving the burrow, for the first time, are more distrustful, and more cautious in the places where war is often made on them, than in places where the snares have never been spread.  This observation, which is incontestable, proves absolutely the need they have of language; for, without it, how could they acquire the knowledge of proper precautions, which knowledge supposes a succession of facts known, of comparisons made, of judgments rendered?  It appears then, that it is absurd to doubt, that brutes have among them a language, by means of which they transmit ideas, the communication of which is necessary to them. (Leroy, 1802, in Gall, 1835, p.29) 

   To the modern reader, Leroy's views on the mechanisms of animal social learning and Gall's uncritical promotion of them (assuming, for the sake of argument, that naive young foxes do, in fact, behave as Leroy asserted they do) may suggest that both gentlemen were singularly thoughtless or gullible.  It is, however, probably more reasonable to assume that the failure of Gall and of Leroy to provide a convincing explanation of the avoidance by naive, young foxes of areas containing snares arose not from thoughtlessness or gullibility, but from a lack of alternative hypotheses to explain the behaviour of foxes. 

   For the contemporary reader, aware of the existence of pheromones, in general (Wilson & Bossert, 1963), and of warning pheromones, in particular (von Frisch, 1941), or knowledgeable about the ways in which European blackbirds (Curio, Ernst, & Vieth, 1978) or rhesus monkeys (Cook, Mineka, Wolkenstein, & Laitsch, 1985) come to avoid potential predators, observations of social influences on avoidance are not evidence of an ability of animals to communicate using language.  However, if, like Gall and Leroy working in the 19th century, we today knew of no means other than language for the transmission of information between individuals, then any evidence of animal communication would serve us, as it served Leroy and Gall, as evidence of human-like speech in nonhumans.  Gall and Leroy did not lack intellectual prowess, they lacked alternative hypotheses with which to explain the behaviours in which they were interested. 

   Imitating Romanes  

   Attribution of social influences on the development of behaviour in animals to their use of language disappeared from the scientific literature in mid-19th century.  Unfortunately, explanation of social learning by animals in terms of humanlike speech was replaced by an equally misleading, equally all-encompassing explanation of social influence on behaviour that proved considerably more difficult to reject than Leroy's idea that animals talk to one another about matters of importance. 

   Darwin, Wallace, Romanes, Morgan (for much of his life), and other, lesser known naturalists of the latter half of the 19th century treated learning by imitation as the primary way in which animals acquire adaptive behaviour.  The ability of animals to learn by imitation was taken for granted.  The only question to be asked was whether the ability to imitate had been exercised in particular instances of behavioural development (Morgan, 1896, p.184). 

   Darwin's disciple and immediate intellectual heir in behavioural matters, George Romanes, was particularly quick to infer that animals were capable of "intelligent perception of the desirability of modification [in behaviour] on the part of certain individuals and to modify their actions accordingly" (Romanes, 1884, p.229).  According to Romanes (p.219), "with animals as with men, original ideas are not always forthcoming at the time they are wanted, and therefore it is often easier to imitate than to invent." 

   Indeed, whenever Romanes (1882, 1884) saw evidence of social influences on learning in animals - whether in groups of newly hatched chicks learning to drink water, weanling lambs avoiding ingestion of toxic plants, or the acquisition of responses by birds of one species to the warning cries of another - he attributed the adaptive modifications of behaviour he described to learning by imitation.  When a cat, resident in Romanes's household, learned to open the garden gate by jumping up and grabbing hold of the latchguard with one forepaw, depressing the thumb piece with the other, and simultaneously kicking at the gate post with her hind legs, Romanes (1882) assumed: first, that the cat had observed humans opening the gate by grasping the handle and moving the latch, second, that the cat had reasoned "If a hand can do it, why not a paw?" (Romanes, 1882, p.422), and, finally, that the cat, motivated by this insight, had attempted to open the garden gate and succeeded. 

   Introspection had convinced Romanes (1882) that much of human behaviour was learned by imitation.  Anthropomorphic inference led Romanes to generalize his introspections to explain acquisition of novel behaviours by animals, as he had explained acquisition of novel behaviours by members of his own species, in terms of learning by imitation (see Galef, 1988c, for further discussion). 

   Constraints on the Study of Animal Learning  

   In the century since Romanes (1882, 1884) published his classic volumes on comparative psychology, the anthropomorphism so common in 19th-century monographs on animal behaviour has been purged from the literature.  Discussions of animal intentions and intelligent perceptions have been replaced by analyses in terms of stimuli, responses, and reinforcers.  This reductionist approach to the analysis of behaviour, advocated by Morgan, Thorndike, and Watson, profoundly influenced not only interpretations of the results of animal learning studies but also their methods and subject matter.  Anecdotal reports of cats and dogs learning complex motor skills by imitating their masters have been superceded by controlled experiments analyzing the factors influencing association formation in laboratory situations.  The resultant changes in the focus of studies of animal learning generally, and of animal social learning particularly, have proven a major advance.  However, as is often the case, progress was not entirely without cost. 

   The introduction, early in the present century, of experimental procedures for investigating association formation resulted in a precipitous shift in the subject matter of animal development studies.  Interest in the development of behaviours exhibited by animals outside the laboratory (the centre of attention since the time of Aristotle) waned.  Conversely, study of laboratory situations in which abstract processes of association formation could best be observed and dissected increased dramatically.  This shift in locus of attention had a profound impact on the study of social learning by animals.  Following Thorndike's (1898) explicit rejection, on theoretical grounds, of the possibility of learning by imitation in animals and failure both by Thorndike (1898) and by numerous other laboratory workers (see Holmes, 1911; Warden & Jackson, 1935; and Washburn, 1908 for reviews) to find convincing evidence of animal imitation, discussions of learning by imitation gradually disappeared from the behavioural literature.  Such discussions were replaced by attempts to analyze instances of social learning, demonstrated in laboratory situations, as special cases of either classical or discriminant operant conditioning (for examples see Church, 1968; Miller & Dollard, 1941).  Study of particular instances of apparent social learning observed outside the laboratory seemed unnecessary; in time, all instances of behaviour acquisition, whether individually or socially based, would be explicable in terms of general laws describing all association formation. 

   Meanwhile, in the world outside the learning laboratory, ducklings continued to follow their mothers, song birds went on singing their species-typical songs, and weaning animals continued to choose the same foods to eat as their more experienced fellows.  The psychological community simply didn't pay attention to such occurrences.  Those learning phenomena that could be explained easily within the framework provided by laboratory learning paradigms received careful study by numerous investigators.  Those instances of animal learning that were more difficult to assimilate into either of the prevailing laboratory paradigms were largely ignored.  Experimental, animal psychologists lost interest in carrying out analyses of instances of animal learning observed outside the laboratory, at least in part because successful study of learning in unconstrained situations required an approach quite different both from the informal anthropomorphizing of 19th-century naturalists and from the paradigm-bound examination of associative processes that dominated the study of animal learning. 

   An Alternative Zeitgeist  

   The development by European ethologists of a complementary framework to that provided by experimental psychology for the study of animal behaviour, in general, and animal learning, in particular, provided the background for a resurgence of interest in the study of behaviours that occurred outside the laboratory.  Ethologists studied behaviours exhibited by members of particular species in interaction with their respective natural environments.  Observations of such naturally occurring behaviours served ethologists as a focus for subsequent developmental, causal, and functional analyses.  Consequently, analyses of the behavioural processes supporting particular instances of social learning observed in natural circumstances fit easily into ethologically oriented research programmes. 

   Further, ethologists were more eclectic than experimental psychologists in discussing processes supporting the acquisition of behaviour; ethologists had no particular commitment to operant or classical paradigms as explanatory systems; and they felt no compulsion to study animal learning in situations where it might occur "free from the helping hand of instinct" (Thorndike, 1911, p.30).  On the contrary, ethologists treated learning as an adjunct to instinctive behavioural sequences (Tinbergen, 1951). 

   Although ethologists both promoted analyses of the development of behaviours observed in uncontrolled environments and maintained an eclectic approach to the study of behaviour acquisition, they lacked a tradition of sophistication and rigour in the analysis of behavioural development, in general, and of animal learning, in particular.  Of course, experimental psychologists had spent decades developing techniques that ethology lacked for the study of acquisition processes in animals.  Hence, by the mid-1960s, the elements of a hybrid ethopsychological framework were available that permitted focus on the question of how naturally occurring behaviours might develop and that provided methods needed to arrive at satisfying answers.  In particular, the question of how animals might use information acquired from others to guide their own behaviour in adaptive directions, a question that, at least implicitly, had been perplexing scientists for the better part of 2 centuries, was finally open to systematic investigation.  The issue was no longer whether animals could imitate, but, rather, how one individual might use the behaviour of others to bias its own development in appropriate directions (Galef, 1989d). 

  PART 2: A PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH 

   For the past 20 years, my co-workers and I have been studying the role of social interaction in the development of adaptive patterns of food selection by Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus).  The immediate goal of this research programme has been to determine the behavioral processes that cause one rat to direct its feeding behaviour towards the same foods that others of its social group are eating and ignore potential foods that others of its social group are not eating.  Equally important, we hoped to develop a general approach to studies of social learning that would be of use to future investigators of analogous behavioral phenomena.  

   My co-workers and I began, as any ethologist would, with field observations of a possible case of social learning.  We brought the behavioral phenomenon observed in the field into the laboratory and, as any psychologist would, then tried to determine under controlled conditions how one animal influenced another's behaviour.  

   Problems Poisoning Norway Rats  

   More than 40 years ago, an applied ecologist who was an expert in the control of Norway rats discovered that when he used a single poison bait in a rat-infested area for several months, despite initial success, later acceptance of the bait was negligible.  As might be expected, many members of the target population died as the result of eating the poisoned bait. 
 </I

    The Object-Line Effect: Is It Attributable to Intercontext Differences or the Structural Properties of Contexts and Task Demands? 
  Bruce Earhard 
  Dalhousie University  

    ABSTRACT   
 Briefly presented target lines are reported more accurately when part of an object-like context than alone (Williams & Weisstein, 1978).  Efforts to explain this effect have tended to focus on structural properties that contexts must possess in order to be effective in facilitating target-line discrimination (e.g., Weisstein, Williams, & Harris, 1982).  Enns and Prinzmetal (1984) take issue with this approach.  They propose that contexts differ more from one another than do target lines presented alone, and it is this fact, and not the general structural properties of contexts, that underlies their effectiveness.  Two experiments examined intercontext differences and structural factors as determinants of context effectiveness.  Subjects were found to use intercontext differences to narrow the range of possible alternatives, but when this factor was controlled, structural properties determined context effectiveness.  The structural interpretation of context effectiveness was found not to be as straightforward as generally assumed, however.  A third experiment showed context effectiveness to be affected by the character of the discrimination task employed. 

   RESUME  Des lignes-cibles presentees brievement sont rapportees avec plus de precision lorsqu'elles font partie d'un contexte figural que presentees toutes seules (Williams & Weisstein, 1978).  Les efforts pour expliquer cet effet se sont concentres sur les proprietes structurales que le contexte doit posseder en vue de faciliter la discrimination lignes-cibles (e.g., Weisstein, Williams, & Harris, 1982).  Enns et Prinzmetal (1984) ont considere cette approche.  Ils proposent que les contextes different plus l'un de l'autre que les lignes-cibles presentees seules et c'est ce fait, et non pas les proprietes structurales generales des contextes, qui sous-tend leur efficacite.  Deux experiences examinaient les differences intercontextes et les facteurs structuraux comme determinants de l'efficacite du contexte.  On a montre que les sujets utilisaient les differences intercontexts pour retrecir l'etendue des alternatives possibles; cependant, quand ce facteur etait controle, les proprietes structurales determinaient l'efficacite du contexte.  L'interpretation structurale de l'efficacite du contexte n'etait cependant pas aussi evidente que generalement assume.  Une troisieme experience a montre que l'efficacite du contexte etait affectee par le caractere de la tache discriminative employee.  

   Briefly presented line segments can be discriminated more accurately within an object-like context than alone (Williams & Weisstein, 1978).  This finding has been termed the object-line effect (OLE).  It has attracted much attention because it is contrary to expectation.  Normally, briefly exposed, adjacent line segments interfere with one another through lateral inhibitory processes (Breitmeyer, 1984).  Line segments, therefore, should be more accurately discriminated when presented alone than when included as one of many line segments constituting a context. 

   Not all contexts are effective in facilitating line discrimination.  Weisstein and her associates have shown that contexts which are coherent (i.e., present a unitary configuration), connected (i.e., have a continuous contour), and three dimensional (i.e., have a depth inducing perspective) are effective in facilitating discrimination of constituent line detail, and contexts lacking these characteristics are not (e.g., Lanze, Maguire, & Weisstein, 1985; Lanze, Weisstein, & Harris, 1982; Weisstein, Williams, & Harris, 1982; Williams & Weisstein, 1978).  Weisstein and her associates suggest that structural properties such as coherence, connectedness, and three dimensionality increase the discriminability of contexts and allow them to be processed more rapidly than contexts lacking these properties or target lines presented alone. 

   An alternative interpretation of the OLE has been recently advanced by Enns and Prinzmetal (1984).  They suggest that in analyzing the OLE, attention should not be focused on the structural properties of contexts, but on the degree to which contexts differ from one another in appearance and the degree to which such differences are greater than those evident among target lines presented alone.  They contend that, in studies demonstrating an OLE, contexts containing target lines differ more from one another than do members of the set of target lines presented alone.  Since each different context is associated with a particular target-line location, subjects can use the distinctive appearance of individual contexts as a basis for inferring which target line has been presented.  Under such circumstances, better performance is to be expected when target lines are presented within contexts than when they are presented alone.  The feasibility of the Enns and Prinzmetal approach has been much strengthened by their demonstration that intercontext dissimilarity, in the absence of any general configural property such as three dimensionality, connectedness, or coherence, can generate an OLE and that making information provided by intercontext differences difficult to use reduces or eliminates the OLE. 

   The research to be reported examines the Enns and Prinzmetal (1984) position.  It was prompted by doubts that the effectiveness of a given set of contexts can be wholly attributed to intercontext differences.  The principal objective was to determine whether context effects attributable to the stimulus properties of contexts can be demonstrated if intercontext configural dissimilarities are controlled. 

  EXPERIMENT 1 

   Experiment 1 was a preliminary study with two objectives.  One objective was to examine Enns and Prinzmetal's (1984) claim that subjects use intercontext differences correlated with target-line location to specify acceptable alternatives in studies of the OLE.  The other objective was to try and determine whether, with intercontext differences controlled, evidence could be obtained to show that the structural properties of contexts remain as an important determinant of the OLE. 

   Method  

   Design and Materials: Subjects were required to specify the position of a broken target line presented alone and within two structurally different types of contexts.  The two different types of contexts are shown in Panel A of Figure 1.  It may be seen that each of the contexts was aligned in two different ways.  At each alignment, only two of the four broken target-line locations were appropriate targets.  If the long axis of either context was aligned vertically, a target line could be located on the left or the right.  If the long axis of either context was aligned horizontally, the target line could occur at the top or bottom.  Context alignment was thus correlated with target-line location.  If subjects are as sensitive to configural variations in contexts as Enns and Prinzmetal (1984) suggest, they should readily discern the consequences of context orientation and utilize this information to narrow down the range of appropriate response alternatives.  As a consequence, they should make few errors that involve alternatives inappropriate with respect to the orientation of a given context. 

   Although the orientation information provided by the two contexts is identical, the two contexts are very different structurally.  One context is flat and unconnected, the other is connected and three dimensional.  If Weisstein is correct and the structural properties of contexts is an important determinant of the OLE, then the connected, three-dimensional context should generate an OLE effect and the flat, unconnected context should not.  Further, any differences generated should not be attributable to intercontext differences correlated with target-line locations of the type described by Enns and Prinzmetal (1984).  Employing a single connected, three-dimensional context and a single flat, unconnected context, rather than a set of different contexts exemplifying each context type, eliminates intercontext configural differences of the type described by Enns and Prinzmetal.  The only variation in context appearance in both connected three-dimensional and unconnected two-dimensional forms is that associated with orientation, and variations associated with orientation are identical for both types of contexts.  Any overall difference between lines presented in context and alone should reflect the ease or difficulty subjects have in determining the position of target-line locations as a function of the structural properties of the two contexts employed. 

   An Imagewriter printer directed by an Apple 2e computer was used to generate the central square of three-dimensional contexts and to introduce broken target lines at the requisite positions.  Angular wing-like appendages were added by a Koh-I-Nor drafting pen with a 0.6 mm nib.  The number and length and type of the line components used in the unconnected, flat context were the same as those used in the three-dimensional context, and the positioning of broken target lines vis a vis the fixation point in outer locations of the unconnected context was identical to that used in the three-dimensional context.  The connected and unconnected contexts subtended visual angles of 2.3 and 2.1, respectively, along the long axis and 1.7 and 1.8, respectively, along the short axis.  Target lines subtended a visual angle of 1.1.  Eight naive subjects participated in the experiment in exchange for course credit points. 

   Procedure: A forced choice procedure required subjects to specify the position of the target line after each presentation by pointing to one of the four possible target-line locations displayed on a response card.  Twenty-four item presentation blocks were used, and within each block, target lines appeared alone and in each of the two different contexts equally often.  Both context orientations and all four target-line locations were sampled equally often within each block.  Drawings of various contexts and lines examined were provided before the start of the study and were available for consultation throughout the experiment.  No information was provided about the fact that horizontal and vertical alignments of contexts could be used to narrow the range of relevant target-line locations.  To familiarize subjects with the general procedure, a block of practice presentations preceded the eight blocks of experimental presentations.  A Gerbrands two-field tachistoscope was used to present stimuli.  A uniformly illuminated preexposure field containing a small fixation dot preceded and followed the exposure field.  As in the Enns and Prinzmetal (1984) study, subjects were required to maintain a predetermined level of accuracy in responding.  The required accuracy level of 50-70% correct responding was established by holding the illumination level of the exposure field of the tachistoscope fixed at 1.7 cd/m2 and varying the illumination level of the uniform field preceding and following the exposure field.  The preliminary practice period was used to establish an appropriate performance level.  As in the Enns and Prinzmetal study, further adjustments were made, if necessary, only at the end of a presentation block after all conditions had been presented an equal number of times.  The mean level of illumination of the field which preceded and followed the exposure field was 3.1 cd/m2.  A fixed exposure duration of 20 ms was used throughout the study.  Subjects were provided no feedback with respect to the accuracy of their responses during the study. 

   Results  

   To determine whether typically observed object-line effects were evident, the proportion of presentations on which target lines were designated correctly was tabulated for each condition.  The mean proportion of target lines correctly specified was higher for target lines within the connected, three-dimensional context than within the flat, unconnected context or than when presented alone (.82, .59, & .55, respectively).  An analysis of variance applied to arc sine transformed proportions indicated that presentation conditions differed reliably, F (2, 14) = 13.46, p Planned comparison tests showed that target lines were discerned significantly more accurately in the three-dimensional context than in the two-dimensional context, t(14) = 4.81, p  Differences in the accuracy with which target lines were discriminated in the flat, two-dimensional context and line-alone condition did not differ reliably. 

  

   Finding that the two contexts differed in the degree to which they facilitated target-line location supports the Weisstein et al. (1982) position that structural properties of contexts are important, but is difficult to reconcile with the approach of Enns and Prinzmetal (1984).  According to Enns and Prinzmetal, pronounced intercontext configural differences have to be evident among the exemplars of a given context type, and these differences have to be correlated with target-line locations for variations in context effectiveness to be manifest.  In the present study, each context type was represented by a single configuration.  The only variation in contexts correlated with target-line location was that associated with context alignment, and that, as has been noted, was identical for both context types. 

   To determine whether subjects took advantage of context alignment to narrow the range of appropriate alternatives, the total number of errors made by each subject were divided according to whether the alternative selected matched the orientation of the target line presented or was nonmatching, that is, orthogonal to the orientation the target line presented.  An analysis of variance carried out on the error data indicated that there were reliable main effects for error type, F (1, 7) = 5.67, p The summary of error data provided in Table 1 shows that the most important factor contributing to the interaction is the marked difference in error patterns between the context and line-alone conditions.  In context conditions, errors involving appropriately oriented alternatives were more common than errors involving inappropriately oriented alternatives, whereas in the line-alone condition the reverse was true.  Why errors involving inappropriately oriented alternatives were twice as frequent in the line-alone condition (19.63 vs. 9.50) as errors involving appropriately oriented alternatives is difficult to understand.  Inspection of presentation sequences and tabulation operations reveals no indication of anomalies that could account for the effect.  Although not readily explained, the distribution of error types in the line-alone condition is of only limited interest. 
 </I

    Preface 

   This book is about the political belief systems of new elites, the youth elites of the 1980s, in the Anglo-American democracies - the old states.  The similarities and differences among and between the political cultures of Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States have been probed, debated, re-examined, and debated again for more than half a century.  In the 1960s, newly developed cross-national survey techniques produced evidence that added fuel to those speculations.  Remarkably, however, no cross-national attitudinal research comparing all five countries followed the path-breaking studies of the 1960s.  This study aims to go some distance towards filling that gap, and the argument it proposes is a simple one.  Enormous changes swept across all advanced industrial states during the last two decades.  The Anglo-American democracies, like other countries, experienced the globalization of their economies, the information revolution, profound structural transformations, and dramatic shifts in population replacement.  Long-standing patterns of political behaviour eroded, traditional alliances unravelled, and new issues forced their way onto political agendas.  The ideological climate of the 1980s, we suggest, bore little resemblance to the ideological climate of the 1960s and, for a variety of reasons, those shifts in ideology were disproportionately concentrated in the ranks of the new generations.  In what respects, then, are the political belief systems of new elites in the Anglo-American democracies similar?  In what respects are they different?  These are the questions we ask, and we answer them with comparative cross-national survey evidence from all five countries. 

   This book is written with a broad audience in mind.  Our aim is to make the results of the study accessible to those without formal training in quantitative methods and to those who are being introduced to, or who have a general interest in, the contemporary politics of the Anglo-American democracies.  Where possible, we present our findings by way of graphic illustrations.  Where we resort to summary statistical presentation of evidence, we rely on relatively few simple measures, which are explained in the text.  Our hope is that this study will contribute to a revitalized debate about politics both in and between each of the five countries as well as about the transformation of advanced industrial states in general. 

   This project was truly a collaborative effort.  We drew heavily upon the goodwill of many colleagues and institutions in all of the five countries represented in the study.  We are happy to be able to acknowledge publicly our gratitude for their help. 

   The study was ten years in the making.  In the late 1970s, while orchestrating the Cross National Survey Project, Sidney Verba co-ordinated a number of brainstorming sessions at the Center for International Affairs, Harvard University, dealing with the opportunities, difficulties, and practicalities of cross-national survey research.  It was during those stimulating meetings that the prospect of undertaking a comparative Anglo-American study was first discussed.  This project would never have been started, undertaken, or completed without the intellectual leadership and moral support of Sidney Verba.  We thank him for allowing us to use the American data for this project.  More importantly, we are very grateful for his continual encouragement. 

   Several other institutions and individuals were also crucial to the project.  The Australian field work was conducted from the Australian National University at both Canberra and Darwin.  The University of Essex gave us work space from which we co-ordinated the British segment of the study.  Tony King, Ian Budge, and Ivor Crewe were very gracious hosts.  Nigel Roberts and Rod Alley made the New Zealand component of the study possible.  And in Canada we were willingly aided in a variety of ways by colleagues across the country.  We particularly appreciate the contributions of Herman Bakvis, Andre Blais, Marsha Chandler, Jean Crete, Barry Kay, Richard Johnston, and Richard Simeon.  Some of the analysis was undertaken at the Center for Political Studies, University of Michigan.  Sam Barnes and Ronald Inglehart made that workspace a home. 

   The project placed a unique burden on our own institution, the University of Calgary. For steering us through a maze of computing related matters we are grateful to Thomas Huang and Ted Ziajka.  We were very lucky to have extremely able research assistants: Robert Burge got the project underway and Lori Galbraith held it together, carrying the bulk of the computational and graphics work through to its conclusion.  We are very appreciative of their efforts and abilities.  We also thank our colleagues in the department of political science for their congenial support. 

   The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada provided the financial wherewithal for the project (SSHRC grant #410-88-0221).  We thank them not only for underwriting the hard costs but also for providing sabbatical leave fellowships that enabled us to conduct the field work and to start attacking the analysis.  Several individuals provided us with constructive criticism of the early drafts of various parts of the book.  Seymour Martin Lipset, Paul Sniderman, and Sylvia Bashevkin were particularly helpful.  Robert Boardman, Jon Pammett, and Campbell Sharman read the entire manuscript and provided both thoughtful commentary and a number of helpful suggestions.  We are very grateful to them, and to Richard Teleky, managing editor of Oxford University Press, who coaxed us along with the manuscript. 

   Both of us borrowed time from our families.  We extend a special thanks to Susan Bloch-Nevitte and Isabel Gibbins, who were understanding when we fell short on what we imagine to be the normal responsibilities of spouses in normal families.

 Neil Nevitte 
 Roger Gibbins
 Calgary, June 1990 

   CHAPTER ONE  
  Ideological Change in the Anglo-American Democracies 

  Introduction 

   This study examines the nature of political belief systems in the five Anglo-American democracies - Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States.  Perhaps no other five countries in the industrialized world are more alike; they share not only roughly comparable economies, social structures, and cultural environments, but also the same political tradition.  Compared with other industrially advanced states, each of the Anglo-American democracies has a long history of open, stable, and liberal democratic style of government.  For the most part, citizens of the Anglo-American democracies view their systems of government as legitimate, and the transfer of power has rarely taken place in an atmosphere of crisis; it has been routine.  Throughout this century political contests have not been battles about the rules of the game; instead, the battles have been about ideas, policies, leaders, and parties. 

   It is not surprising, then, that comparative social scientists often regard the Anglo-American democracies as a special subset of advanced industrial states, a distinct analytic category.  This practice gained considerable momentum in the 1950s and early 1960s with the publication of such landmark works as Louis Hartz's Founding of New Societies, Alexander Brady's Democracy in the Dominions, Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba's Civic Culture, and Robert Alford's Party and Society.  These studies, along with a number of influential articles by Seymour Martin Lipset, Gabriel Almond, and others, all underscored the same point: Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States were all 'different examples of the same type'.  Some scholars emphasized the remarkably similar 'climate' or 'spirit' of politics in the five states.  Others identified secularism and homogeneity as the unifying themes, while yet others pointed up similarities in styles of political combat and political values - pluralism, pragmatism, individualism, and the non-ideological sense of compromise.  The language differed but the message was the same - all five countries shared a common political culture beyond what one might expect from their similar status as Western industrialized states. 

   By the middle of the 1960s, however, the conceptual tide turned.  Armies of scholars drawing upon a variety of analytical traditions, and working from national rather than cross-national perspectives, challenged the notion that the Anglo-American democracies were 'essentially the same'.  The historical vineyards were re-worked to show that 'significant differences' existed, and could be traced to variations in founding traditions.  Variations in political institutions, social structures, and literary traditions were probed to bolster the case for the essential differences between national political cultures.  Canadian scholars, for example, reacting perhaps to concerns about the 'Americanization' of Canadian culture, entered the fray contending that the differences between Canadian and American values were not 'mere nuances', but fundamental.  American analysts, meanwhile, busily mounted a powerful and incidentally complementary case for American exceptionalism.  Throughout the Anglo-American democracies, the effort and conclusions focused on contrasts, not similarities. 

   Today the friction between these two visions persists, and in the final analysis it hinges on one central empirical question: Are there significant differences between and among the contemporary political cultures of the five Anglo-American democracies?  Certainly there are countless national arguments to support, for example, the expectation that the political culture of Australia will differ significantly from that of Britain, and that of Britain from the political culture of the United States.  For readers and scholars in those countries whose main concern is to explain national political cultures to domestic populations, idiosyncratic features are often to be treasured and vigorously defended.  At the same time, however, we have compelling reasons to expect cultural similarity.  The Anglo-American democracies not only share the structural characteristics common to all industrial states; they also share a common political tradition.  Thus the expectation of similarity is driven not only by more general patterns of structural and ideological convergence within the Western world, but also by history.  At root, however, remains the basic empirical question: Are there significant national differences in political culture?  Until and unless such differences can be demonstrated, it is premature to speculate on the reasons why national differences might persist in an era of global ideological convergence. 

   Methodological Overview  

   Our entry into this debate about cross-national similarities and differences in political values is shaped by three themes that regularly emerge in these disputes.  First, we accept, of course, that competing interpretations of the same phenomena are a normal part of academic debate in all disciplines, as are attempts to resolve discrepancies of interpretation.  In this instance, for example, it might be argued that the differences between the two visions of the Anglo-American democracies can be squared away simply by acknowledging that each operates at a different level of generalization.  After all, what appears close up to be an 'important difference' easily fades into insignificance when global comparisons are entertained.  Australians and Canadians might be expected to be alert and sensitive to differences between the two countries, whereas an observer from Africa could be excused for emphasizing their similarities (climatic differences notwithstanding!).  But that line of reasoning is not entirely convincing either, because it obscures the fact that much of the debate centres around the same unit of observation - national values - and that the empirical question still remains as to whether or not significant differences exist. 

   Second, most comparative judgements about values in the five Anglo-American democracies rely almost entirely upon indirect evidence.  National differences in crime rates, for example, might be used to speculate on the importance of citizen deference to political elites in the civic cultures of the countries under examination.  However, forming conclusions about contemporary public attitudes on the basis of inherited political institutions and social patterns is risky and contentious.  It is equally hazardous to rely on a theory about founding traditions to make inferences about the national values of populations several generations removed from founding circumstances.  The problem is that to get from institutional, social structural, literary, and historical evidence to conclusions about national values in the 1980s and beyond requires a logical leap of faith.  Many of the existing studies that rely on these impressionistic sources are both imaginative and persuasive, but they do not escape the limitations of having to rely on inference.  This debate about comparative similarities and differences has raged now for more than twenty-five years, during which time comparative social scientists have continued to use the Anglo-American democracies as a major analytic category.  From that standpoint, it is remarkable that no single study has ever provided direct comparative evidence of national values in all five countries. 

   Third, and relatedly, if claims to the effect that the Anglo-American democracies share 'essentially the same political values' ring hollow in the absence of direct evidence of those similarities, then so do counterclaims about national uniqueness. 
 </I

      EDUCATIONAL CHANGE  
   CAN WE MAKE SENSE OF REALITY? 
   by Rod A. Wickstrom 

   WARREN BENNIS, in his recent book,  Why Leaders Can't Lead , has suggested that: 

     In the 1960s, we wanted to make the world better.  In the 1970s, we wanted only to make ourselves better.  Now, at the start of the 1990s, we seem to be uncertain about whether we can make anything better.   1    1. Warren Bennis,  Why Leaders Can't Lead  (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1990), p. xiii.     

   Clearly, such a negative view of pos  sibilities has not prevailed on the edu  cational scene over the past decade.  Indeed, education has been bombarded with a staggering variety of proposed changes in recent years.  Consider a few examples:

 &bullet; One writer suggested that the way to correct the  "dismal failure"  of Canada's education system is to refuse anyone a driver's license until high school is completed. 

 &bullet; Several provinces have moved toward increased amalgamation of school districts as a means of improving effi  ciency. 

&bullet; Singer Joni Michell is reported to have suggested at an arts education con  ference that the way to produce more artists is to discourage them. 

&bullet; One of the restructuring initiatives undertaken in a U.S. school included the local decision to operate with no princi  pal, but instead have five management leaders and 17 committees. 

&bullet; Japanese educational authorities, long characterized in this century as operating the  "model"  education system, are seriously reviewing North American education because they are concerned about the lack of creativity developed in Japanese schools.

&bullet; In South Carolina, the state has tried providing  "bonuses"  to schools exhibiting good standardized test scores. 

&bullet; And in the United Kingdom, long considered a bastion of local school autonomy in curriculum, the central authority has moved toward a national curriculum. 

   Virtually every western nation and every Canadian province is undergoing some form of educational reform.  The real challenge for many becomes one of understanding these proposals, many of which seem contradictory and some simply ludicrous. 

   The way we make sense out of expe  rience is, of course, very individual.  The intent of this article is to share the writer's  "cognitive maps,"  in the hope that readers might better understand current developments and inform themselves for more effective practice.  Any such attempt would seem to require an indica  tion of the reasons for action or change, the nature of proposed changes, and the methods of implementing change. 

    The reasons for change  

   The voices of demand for improve  ment in our schools are many, varied, and increasingly insistent, but they can probably be grouped under two main headings. 

    Internal  - From within the educational establishment itself - classrooms, schools, districts, professional associa  tions, universities - come many of these pressures for change. 

   Partly, this relates to our knowledge base, which has been growing and deve  loping.  The practical realities that teachers face from day to day (for example, the recognition of just how diffi  cult it is to motivate the unwilling learner or to make learning meaningful to students who are subject to so much stimuli) provide much cause for the search for better approaches. 

   Add to this the theoretical contribu  tions to our knowledge base.  The increas  ed understanding from cognitive psycho  logy of how we must place new learning into our own individual meaningful  "whole"  or context, or the recognition of Piagetian developmental stages, are examples of knowledge that place demands on us for change. 

   But we also deal constantly with the awareness of unrealized expectations in education.  For how many decades have we known that elementary school science should be a much richer experience for students, yet we've managed to change so little?  If critical thinking has been a goal of education for the past half century, why does there seem to be so little evidence of its presence in everyday life? 

    External  - To these voices from within education must be added many external concerns. 

   Economic realities play a very important part in these external demands.  Not only do we face stress from dimishing public resources for education, but the economic environment has changed to the point where there is little place left for the unskilled in our society.  So we hear strident voices crying over a dropout rate that would have been consi  dered unimaginably good a few decades ago.  Can the schools actually develop in all students a level of skill and knowledge which not long ago was required only of the relatively few?  Or can we appro  priately increase our  graduates'  problem-solving ability as necessary in a com  plicated post-industrial society? 

   And then, of course, we have the pressures of social changes.  The list seems endless: sexually transmitted diseases, drugs, violence, family and community breakdown, a more scienti  fically and technically based workplace - all demand the school's attention. 

    The nature of proposed changes  

   The demands for change identified above do not lead to a single conclusion.  In fact, they not only become mixed, indistinct, and unclear, but often exist in some tension.  The need for the school to  Table Figure 1  be a warm, caring place where students can find comfort from the fractured home or community in which they exist, for example, is not necessarily compatible with the need for more effort, and a more harshly competitive economic climate.  Similarly, the pressures for reduced drop-out rates may conflict with demands that all students have a higher level of tech  nical and scientific literacy.  And the diffe  rent  "mixtures"  of these demands can produce greatly variant conceptions of what the school should be. 

   One useful approach is to consider these different pictures of education metaphorically.  At least seven metaphors depicting the changed school as it  "should be"  seem common.  They are shown in Figure 1. 

     The Factory   

   One picture of the  "new school"  is presented as follows: 

     If we expect children to participate fully and equally in this democratic society, they must learn a  common, shared foundation  of knowledge, as well as certain  common beliefs  and standards of conduct  [Emphasis added].  2    2.   A Legacy for Leaners: The Report  of the  Royal Commission on Education  (Victoria, BC 1988), p. 94.     

   Clearly, this is a picture of the Factory - a place where the emphasis is on pro  ductivity, uniformity and quality control.  And although educators may recoil at the coldness of that picture, they also would find it difficult to disagree with the need for common learning and a guarantee of success. 

   A modification of this metaphor is heard in the vision of a  "technological laboratory".   This is still an uncommon view, but increasingly the school of the future is pictured as one dominated by computerized learning, with well-programmed software leading all students, on an individualized basis, to mastery of essential skills and knowledge. 

     The Department Store   

   In a department store, or a large con  vention, we can pick and choose accord  ing to our interests.  Another quote from the same source suggests that: 

    ...the larger challenge for the provincial system rests in attempting to establish what one scholar describes as  "a system of plurality of excellence"  ... a variety of career paths in formal schooling leading to different types of high level competence other than academic ability.  3    3.   A Legacy for Learners: The Report of the Royal Commission on Education  (Victoria, BC: 1988), p. 104.     

   Clearly this metaphor places stress on variety and choice.  Indeed, in many cir  cles there are suggestions that the choice should be extended not only to students in school, but also to parents for a choice of the school their children attend. 

     The Family   

   There are few parents, when sending their first child off to the first day at school, who do not at heart wish that the school will, after all, be not that different from home - a kind of second family, where love, compassion, and co-opera  tion prevail.  And certainly that desire is echoed by many in society who see the school as too harsh, too unsuited to  students'  individual needs and aspira  tions. 

     The Garden   

   If the family metaphor comes primari  ly from parents, a closely allied picture comes mainly from educators - the view of the school as a garden (or perhaps more correctly, an  "untended meadow" ), a place where beautiful things grow at their own rate and in their own manner, if only educators provide the right conditions.  The school, according to this conception, should be characterized by growth, beauty, diversity, and interest.  Consider, for example, the words of psychologist Carl Rogers: 

     ... I turn to an activity, a purpose, which really warms me - the facilitation of learn  ing.  When I have been able to transform a group - and here I mean all the members of a group, myself included - into a community of  learners , then the excitement has been almost beyond belief.  To free curiosity; to permit individuals to go charging off in new directions dictated by their own questioning and exploration; to recognize that everything is in process of change - here is an experience I can never forget.  4    4.   Carl Rogers,  Freedom to Learn  (Columbus, OH. Charles E. Merrill Publishing, 1969).     

     The Olympics   

   One only need imagine a sportscaster ludicrously commenting on a 100-metre dash,  "That was a wonderful race, with no winners,"  to realize the nature of this image.  For the Olympics are meant, through competition, to bring out the best in competitors.  And while the stress on winners in this metaphor may seem inappropriate, with slight modification we can all see merit in a conception of school which sets hurdles and demands excellence. 

     The Freedom March   

   The vivid pictures we have seen in recent years of the masses marching for freedom in Eastern Europe or China call forth this metaphor - a picture of the school as a place for developing some passion over a worthwhile cause.  The voices raised for environmental educa  tion or Canadian identity have this common theme: school should instil in students, indeed indoctrinate them, with this intense desire to do something worth  while. 

     The Clinic   

   The medical model of a clinic, where the patient is referred for successively more sophisticated investigations and diagnostic procedures, has its reflection in an image of the school.  In this view, present in the  "cascade"  model of special education services, for example, the school should be characterized by much more precision, as we seek to find the problem in someone's inability to learn, and to fix it. 

   The purpose in describing these vary  ing concepts of the school is not to denigrate any.  Indeed, each has some validity in responding to some of the demands for change.  But we should note that these views are often in conflict.  The result, once again, is part of the tension faced in schools, at the board table, and in communities. 

    A framework  

   At this point, a digression is necessary to outline a framework presented by John Ingalls.  5    5. J. D. Ingalls,  Human Energy  (Don Mills, ON: Addison-Wesley, 1976), pp. 9-18.   Ingalls has suggested that people have two major categories of needs, which in turn lead to two major types of behaviour.  Type A Behaviours he identi  fies as those which represent the basic human  need for certainty , while Type B Behaviours are those representing a capacity for tolerating  ambiguity or uncer  tainty .  A brief description of each is con  tained in Figure 2. 

    Ingalls'  major point is that both types of behaviour are normal, natural, and universal and, in fact, are required in our society.  Type A Behaviours, which express our needs for certainty, are the basis for all rationality.  They are, in fact, behaviours of control which represent our efforts to  "make sense of things,"  and hence they diminish the degree of free  dom and spontaneity which exists.  Type B Behaviours, on the other hand, tend to be very accepting, and hence reduce conflict; however, if they alone are present, they would make any concerted effort virtually impossible. 

   One can speculate that just as such behaviours are natural and necessary for individuals, so are they for organizations.  Both types of behaviour, for example, can be considered essential in school systems.  One type is ideally suited to obtaining maximum information which is a requir  ed condition for effective problem-solving.  The other enables some consis  tent and co-ordinated effort toward common goals. 

   This framework can be applied to the variant metaphors or conceptions of the school.  Certainly it seems reasonable to suggest that the concepts underlying metaphors of the Factory, Olympics, and Freedom March appeal to the need for certainty, control, and consistency.  Table Figure 2   The Department Store, Garden, Family metaphors, however, present concep  tions of education that provide for beha  viours leading to ambiguity, variety, and creativity.  The clinic can respond to the need for either kind of behaviour.  

    The implementation of change  

   Although most would probably accept the internal and external factors that demand change, reaching decisions on the desirable types of change is much more of a problem.  Even if such consen  sus is reached, we also face a variety of available approaches to implementing a model of the  "new school."   

   Here again, the educational techni  ques and the leadership approaches at our disposal can be categorized under the two types of needed behaviours. 

   Some significant techniques fall under both headings.  In the interest of promot  ing greater consistency, certainty, and control, for example, we use core cur  riculum, objectives and directions, mastery learning, textbooks, and high student expectations.  Leadership ap  proaches that create a common vision, or depend upon centralized decision-making, tend to promote consistency types of behaviours as well.  

   In the interests of promoting variety, ambiguity and creativity, on the other hand, we use curricular electives, increased professional autonomy, indi  vidualization, a variety of learning materials, and student interest.  Leader  ship approaches that increase personal freedom or rely on human relations skills have similar purposes. 

   Once again, we observe a certain degree of conflict and tension between the behaviours or approaches we use to pro  mote consistency and control and those required to encourage variety and creati  vity. 

    Conclusions  
 

 
  Introduction 
  SOCIOLOGY: ITS SCOPE AND CENTRAL CONCERNS 

   If one were to ask the majority of sociologists to define the scope and substance of sociology in a few sentences, they most likely would reply in something like the following terms.

  Sociology is a social science devoted to the study of human groups of all kinds and all sizes.  A group may be defined as two or more interacting individuals.  The interaction of individuals gives rise to a variety of social relations and social processes such as cooperation, competition, conflict, and domination.  The full range of human behavior and relations is the subject matter of sociology. 

   We call sociology a science because our main intellectual aim is to comprehend and explain the workings of the social world.  Like all sciences, sociology pursues truth and knowledge by employing methods of inquiry based on logic and evidence and by subjecting theories and findings to an ongoing critical examination.   

   However, the statement we have placed in the mouths of our colleagues tends to exaggerate their unity of outlook.  The differences among sociologists are often as significant as their common ground.  Some sociologists imitate the methods of the natural sciences and see themselves working in close parallel with physicists and chemists; other sociologists believe they share the aims of novelists and poets.  Between those extremes there is a wide range of research methods, techniques, ideas, and just plain notions.  Nevertheless, the several different sociologies do have something in common that may be called the sociological perspective or approach. 

   The essentials of the sociological approach are best conveyed by introducing the student to the pioneers of sociological theory and analysis who wrote in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.  Their works are now regarded as the classic tradition of sociological thinking because they have stood the test of time.  We refer to these writings again and again; we rely on pioneers' theoretical ideas; we employ their concepts; we continue to investigate questions they raised; and, finally, we emulate their intellectual craftsmanship.  In a word, the classic tradition provides the theoretical foundations of the sociological perspective. 

   In this introduction we cannot fully convey the intellectual riches of that tradition, nor can we dwell on the specific works and ideas of the thinkers who contributed to it.  Those are among the tasks of this book as a whole.  All we can do here is to provide a general idea of the tradition's significance. 

   Not all sociologists would agree on the thinkers to be included in the classic tradition.  Some of our colleagues would have longer lists than others.  However, most lists would have to include at least three of the masters who receive detailed consideration in this book: Emile Durkheim, Karl Marx, and Max Weber.  Although the names of these men are not likely to mean anything to the beginning student, we mention them here and postpone introducing them until the appropriate contexts in the following chapters. 

   The founders of the discipline which we today call sociology did not necessarily look upon themselves as professional sociologists.  One finds in their writings an exploration of the full scope of the human condition.  They freely availed themselves of the intellectual resources of anthropology, psychology, history, economics, and philosophy.  Today those fields of study are distinct academic disciplines with jealously guarded borders.  But for the classical sociological thinkers, academic boundaries were either nonexistent or quite fluid.  They were more interested in addressing significant questions than in remaining faithful to this or that academic area. 

   It is therefore in the spirit of the classical tradition that sociology is conceived of and introduced in this book.  Following in the footsteps of the pioneering masters, we shall try to focus attention on key questions.  In the remainder of this introduction, we merely raise some of those questions in the hope that the student will agree on their importance and look forward to addressing them. 

  QUESTIONS ADDRESSED SOCIOLOGICALLY IN THIS BOOK 

   What are the similarities and differences between humans and other living creatures?  It is true that human beings share many physiological characteristics with some other members of the animal kingdom.  But is it not also true that the human possesses something more than they do?  What does that "more" consist of? 

   A related issue is the nature of human nature.  Is the human being driven by instincts, by internal, genetically determined biopsychic forces?  Are humans innately aggressive, as Konrad Lorenz and other prestigious students of animal behavior have alleged?  Or to take an opposing but equally influential view, are humans wholly determined by external, environmental factors?  The psychologist B. F. Skinner, for example, has claimed that human beings are passive entities totally shaped by external stimuli.  For Skinner and his followers, "autonomy," "will," "mind," "self," and other forms of consciousness are just so many illusions.  Finally, there is the question raised anew in recent years by sociobiologists: How do the principles of human social organization compare with those on which animal societies are based? 

   As one shifts attention to large human organizations and societies, new theoretical problems emerge.  How does a society establish and maintain order; that is, ensure a measure of internal peace that will enable its members to attend to their vital affairs?  What is the connection between order and justice?  That question was skillfully explored by the renowned French sociologist Emile Durkheim, who noted that modern industrial society is largely based on formal contractual relations.  Contracts are often made between social unequals, where one party dominates and the other has no choice but to serve or to suffer worse consequences.  Durkheim's reply, as we shall see, raises the critical question of whether a social order resting on basic social inequalities can be stable. 

   However, the social theorist who raised that question most dramatically was Karl Marx, the well-known nineteenth-century writer whose ideas have had so much political influence in the present century.  Sociologists have increasingly recognized that Marx made significant contributions to sociological theory and analysis, especially for the study of social classes and social change.  Though Marx and Marxism are highly controversial subjects, we shall try to discuss his work objectively, with the aim of highlighting his sociological contributions. 

   Social stratification is the term sociologists employ to describe the study of inequalities based on wealth, power, prestige, and other social conditions.  Key questions are: How do basic social inequalities come about?  How are they perpetuated?  Are modern societies still structured along social-class lines?  Some sociologists favor a social-class type of analysis; others do not.  Some sociologists believe that basic social inequalities can be reduced and even eliminated.  Others insist on the necessity of social inequality, arguing that a society's social positions must be stratified and that the rights and duties associated with those positions must be unequal.  Similarly, some theorists hold that throughout history, from the dawn of civilization to the present, two classes of people have been evident: One that rules and another that is ruled.  That state of affairs has prevailed whether government has been despotic, aristocratic, democratic, or what have you.  Moreover, the division of society into rulers and ruled, those theorists maintain, is inevitable and bound to persist so long as there are human societies on earth.  We shall subject several such theories to close scrutiny.  We argue that inequalities can be reduced to a degree, although they are without doubt stubbornly persistent.  We also sketch some of the main changes that have taken place in the class structures of Canada and other societies, especially during the twentieth century, and outline some of the forces likely to cause more change in the near future. 

   One very clear manifestation of social inequality is the status of ethnic and racial minorities.  Ethnic and racial minorities the world over have continued to suffer from a variety of disabilities, including prejudice, discrimination, segregation, exploitation, and persecution.  The vastness of the subject constrains us to focus attention on minorities in Canada.  We demonstrate that race and ethnicity have roots that are more social than biological or purely cultural.  We show, moreover, that while most immigrant groups experience considerable upward mobility in Canada, certain groups, notably French and aboriginal Canadians, experience persistent inequality as conquered peoples.  Thus, we agree only in part with John Porter, one of the founding fathers of Canadian sociology, who saw Canada as a country of fewer mobility opportunities. 

   Social institutions have been central to the concerns of sociology from its very inception.  In the language of sociology, an institution is a firmly established social practice together with its accompanying form of organization.  Examples of major institutions are the family and religion.  In our discussion of the family, we shall concern ourselves mainly with the question of whether the family is in a state of decline.  We demonstrate that nuclear families (composed of a married man and woman living with children) are becoming less common all the time and now comprise only a fifth of Canadian households.  We examine a variety of factors that help account for the proliferation of family forms: the increased participation of women in the paid labor force, the increased use of various means of birth control, the increased acceptability of homosexuality, and so forth.  Paradoxically, we conclude that the family is not in a state of crisis; in our judgment the growth of various family forms yields increased freedom for family members. 

   In studying the institutions of religion, sociologists concern themselves with the connections between religious phenomena and other facets of social life.  What are the social roots of the idea of the divine?  Why is a belief in the divine found in all societies?  Why is the sacred everywhere sharply distinguished from the profane?  Is religion a positive phenomenon in that it meets certain basic social and individual needs?  Or is it injurious to humans, blinding them to reality and forestalling a rational understanding of their actual circumstances?  Is the influence of religion declining in modern society?  To shed light on those and other intriguing questions, we employ the classical writings of William James, Emile Durkheim, Bronislaw Malinowski, Sigmund Freud, Karl Marx, and Max Weber. 

   Besides institutions, another central concern of sociology is to understand social movements and other forms of collective behavior.  Why and how do some small groups become mass movements?  Throughout history we see evidence of concerted social action on the part of large numbers of people.  Religious, political, and other social movements appear again and again.  We analyze the rise of Naziism in Germany in the 1930s, and the growth of the farmers' and workers' movements in Canada in the twentieth century.  These case studies demonstrate how a variety of social factors - discontent, ideology, leadership, and power resources - shapes the success or failure of collective attempts to change society. 

   Another major area of sociological concern is deviant behavior or the question of why some people deviate from the norms (rules, standards, and laws) of society.  Crime is an example of deviant behavior.  What makes a person become a criminal?  Traditional nonsociological replies to that question are that a criminal is an abnormal human being afflicted with some defect that accounts for his or her deviance or that a criminal is an atavism, a kind of throwback to an earlier evolutionary stage who possesses ferocious instincts.  This last view was in fact the doctrine promoted by a well-known nineteenth-century criminologist, Cesare Lombroso. 

   However, Lombroso's younger contemporary, Durkheim, had a quite different view of the matter.  In his pioneering sociological analysis, he put forth the proposition that deviance, like conformity, is firmly rooted in social conditions.  Building on the work of Durkheim, we address such matters as how an individual becomes a criminal, the nature of lower-class criminal subcultures, the higher incidence of certain types of law violations in the American ghettos and among aboriginal Canadians, white-collar and corporate crime, and, finally, the gender distribution of crime.  How do societies change?  What processes account for the transformation of society and culture?  Urbanization, for instance, had a beginning and can be traced to the ancient Near East.  On the site of biblical Jericho, archeologists have uncovered in the oldest strata the remains of a community dating back to the eighth millennium B.C.  Those strata appear to be evidence of the earliest human settlement on record.  Another of the earliest human settlements is Jarmo, located on the foothills running along the Tigris-Euphrates plain between Iraq and Iran.  Archeological methods (carbon-14 tests) indicate that farming communities existed in that region by about 6750 B.C.  However, neither of those ancient settlements, though large and proto-urban in some respects, were true cities.  Rather, they were tangible evidence of the Neolithic Revolution, which prepared the way for genuine urbanization.  
 </I

   ONE 
  Introduction: 
  An Overview of the Party 

   The roots of the federal New Democratic Party lie in the Great Depression of the 1930s.  In 1932, 131 delegates from a variety of organizations gathered together in Calgary and decided to form the 'Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (Farmer, Labour, Socialist)'.  A year later, the CCF held its first annual convention in Regina and drafted the Regina Manifesto, a statement of principles that is for many the touchstone of Canadian socialism.  In 1992 the New Democratic Party, the successor to the CCF, celebrates sixty years of CCF-NDP history.  Without a doubt, the party can take much pride in its political accomplishments.  But that pride is combined with serious reflection and critical self-appraisal regarding the past, and some concern about the future. 

   Is the federal NDP stalled as a third party?  Has it largely failed in its efforts to be more successful than its predecessor, the CCF?  Why, despite its image repackaging, does the NDP continue to make so little progress in Quebec?  What are the long-term prospects in the industrial heartland of Ontario?  Is the party's provincial base in the west still its main strength?  Has the NDP ceased to provide a clear socialist alternative to the two old-line parties?  Has the NDP become more a brokerage party and less an ideologically-based movement?  Why, after almost sixty years, has the NDP not made greater gains?  In providing an overview of the party, particularly during the 1980s, this chapter will suggest some preliminary answers to these questions, which will be considered in more detail in later chapters. 

  SUPPORT 

   After reaching its peak at 15.6% in 1945, the federal CCF vote dropped consistently in the four subsequent elections: to 13.4% in 1949, 11.3% in 1953, 10.7% in 1957, and 9.5% in 1958.  Like the Socialist Party of the United States, the CCF was clearly on the path to oblivion.  But the birth of the NDP gave new electoral vitality to Canada's socialist movement.  Winning 13.5% of the vote in its maiden election, in 1962, the NDP did better than had the CCF in all but one of the elections it contested.  On average, from 1962 to 1988 the federal NDP has acquired 17.2% of the vote, as compared with 11.1% for the CCF - a clear gain of 6.1%, and a 55% increase over its forerunner's record.  In seven of the ten federal elections since 1962 the NDP has gained a higher percentage of votes than the CCF did even in its best year, 1945. 

   Only once, however, has the CCF-NDP received more than 20% of the federal vote: this was in 1988, when the party exceeded its 26-year average (1962-88) in every province or region except Manitoba and Nova Scotia (see Appendix Table 1).  Although it has increasingly surpassed the 20% barrier in Gallup polls, it has not yet become a major party on the brink of power. 

   Nor, despite these overall gains, has the NDP's electoral support shown improvement over the CCF's in all regions equally.  Regionalization between and within parties is a fact of life in Canadian politics, and the CCF-NDP is no exception.  When data are compared regarding the average federal vote by province for the CCF and the NDP (see Table 1.1), we find that in Saskatchewan support has declined from 34.7% for the CCF to 32.4% for the NDP.  The biggest drop was in the years 1962-65, when the province returned no NDP MPs - the only period in the combined history of the federal CCF-NDP that this has been so.  Several factors offer explanations: (1) resentment over the transformation of the CCF into the NDP in the only province where the CCF had formed a government; (2) disappointment over T.C. Douglas's departure from Saskatchewan politics to return to Ottawa; and (3) growing disenchantment with the provincial CCF as it neared the end of its second decade of uninterrupted power. 

   In part the NDP was formed with urban, labour-oriented Ontario in mind, and it was in that province that its greatest increase in support occurred: from a 10.7% average for the CCF to a 20.0% average for the NDP.  The party has seen a virtual doubling of its Ontario vote, a seven-fold increase in the average number of seats won per election (from just over one in the CCF era to eight), and an equally large increase in the percentage of its total seats coming from that province (from 7.1% to 31.1%). 

   The old CCF was an electoral disaster in Quebec, where it averaged a mere 1.5% of the vote.  Some problems were present right from the start.  Few Francophones attended the founding convention, and the name Cooperative Commonwealth Federation did not translate well into French.  Most of Quebec's Roman Catholic population, and particularly its leadership, regarded the party as atheistic, materialistic, and anti-clerical.  In policy, moreover, the CCF stressed the need for a strong federal government and central planning at the expense of provincial powers and jurisdiction - another point on which most Quebeckers were especially sensitive.  Finally, the heavy Anglophone membership of the Quebec CCF reinforced the CCF's image as a party antithetical to French Canadian interests. 

   Another reason for the NDP's creation was to make a new and better start in Quebec.  While no significant breakthrough has yet occurred in a general election, the NDP, with an average 8.1% of the vote, has fared much better than did the CCF.  Overall, the province has given the NDP its third-largest increase in votes over the CCF, and the third-highest percentage of the party's total votes (12.5%); judging by the 1988 election, more than one in ten NDP voters are now located in Quebec.  And if the province has yet to elect a single NDP MP in a general election, the party has on two separate occasions acquired a solitary Quebec MP; once by means of a defection from the Conservatives (Robert Toupin, from 1987 until 1988) and once, more significantly, through a by-election victory (Phil Edmonston in Chambly in 1990).  Whether these small steps are indicative of potentially greater future gains for the NDP in Quebec, particularly during a general election, remains to be seen. 

   That the NDP has been better able than the CCF to establish a presence in all parts of Canada can be seen both in the greater percentage of ridings in which it has run candidates (61.3% for the CCF vs. 96.0% for the NDP) and in the fact that it has increased its vote in almost all regions of Canada (see Table 1.1).  For example, the average percentage vote for the NDP in the province in which its record has been the worst - Prince Edward Island - is still higher than the CCF's average in several provinces. 
 
   The CCF has often been portrayed as a western protest movement (e.g., Lipset, 1968: 188).  Certainly its leaders came from the west, as did the vast majority of its MPs (89.3%) (see Table 1.2).  

   With respect to total votes cast for the NDP, the more populous east (i.e., Ontario and Quebec), not surprisingly, accounts for the larger proportion: 60.5%, as compared with 39.6% from the west.  Total votes, however, are far from the only criterion.  The NDP's representation in Parliament continues to have a western orientation, with 67.3% of its seats coming from the west.  This is a lower rate than in the CCF days, but still somewhat at variance with the party's total votes.  For example, the 1988 election saw record-high NDP votes in three western provinces: 44.2% in Saskatchewan, 37.0% in British Columbia, and 17.4% in Alberta. 

   In two other important ways the NDP retains a very strong western orientation.  On the one hand, 1987 data on the 276,128 members of the party affiliated indirectly through unions (see Table 1.4) indicate that the east in general and Ontario in particular accounted for the overwhelming majority (79.5% and 76.0% respectively).  In contrast, 1987 data on direct individual members (see Table 1.5) reveal that 73.0% of these were found in the west.  To a considerable degree this may reflect the NDP's strong provincial bases in this region, since federal-party members are also simultaneously provincial-party members (except in Quebec from 1989 onwards).  Until the 1990 upset victory in Ontario, the only provinces in which the CCF-NDP had formed governments were in the west: from 1972 to 1975 in British Columbia, from 1944 to 1964 and 1971 to 1982 in Saskatchewan, from 1969 to 1977 and 1981 to 1988 in Manitoba, and from 1985 to the present in the Yukon.  Any decline in the party's provincial fortunes in the west, therefore, is likely to have an effect upon the federal party's position in terms of both membership and finances. 

   In Saskatchewan the Blakeney NDP government had been dramatically defeated in 1982.  The party received only 37.2% of the vote, its worst showing in forty-four years, and went from 44 seats to 8, the most precipitous drop ever for the provincial CCF-NDP in Saskatchewan (Fox, 1982: 682-4).  Nevertheless, a considerable NDP base remained, and in the provincial election of 1986 the party received 45.2% of the vote, a sizeable increase from 1982.  In fact, this was the highest vote for any of the parties - and higher than in 1975, when the NDP had formed the government.  But because the electoral system was weighted more heavily to the less populated rural ridings, the NDP won only 25 legislative seats (Fox, 1987: 414-15); the Conservatives, with only 44.6% of the vote but 38 seats, formed the government and stalled Allan Blakeney's attempted comeback.  It would remain for Roy Romanow, Blakeney's successor in the province that pioneered Canada's socialist programmes, to return the provincial NDP to power.  Certainly the NDP 's record-high 1988 federal vote in Saskatchewan gave renewed reason for optimism on the eve of the 1991 provincial election, which was fought on the issues of privatization, government decentralization (Pitsula and Rasmussen, 1990), and the economic plight of Prairie farmers.  Romanow was elected Premier with over 50% of the vote and a massive 55 of 66 seats.  Saskatchewan was clearly back in the NDP fold.  

   In British Columbia in the 1980s, the provincial NDP, which had formed the government under Dave Barrett from 1972 to 1975, failed twice to return to power.  However, with 44.2% of the vote in 1983, and 42.6% in 1986, down slightly from its previous high of 45.2% in 1979, the party was still in good health organizationally, and the record-high vote and seats won in the province in the 1988 federal election were promising.  The ongoing financial scandals of Bill Vander Zalm's Social Credit government and the lacklustre performance of his successor Rita Johnston contributed to the collapse of the Social Credit vote in the 1991 provincial election.  While the NDP vote itself again fell slightly to 39.8%, it was still sufficient to thwart the resurgent Liberal Party.  The NDP won 51 seats and provincial leader Mike Harcourt became Premier of British Columbia. 

   The NDP's greatest success stories in the 1980s were its two provincial victories in Manitoba.  Returning to power in 1981, the Manitoba NDP not only won the most seats in its history (34), but also received its highest vote ever (47.4%).  In 1986, despite a decline in its vote to 40.6% (second place to the Conservatives), the party retained a slim majority of seats (30, to the Conservatives' 26) and continued, albeit precariously, as the provincial government for another two years. 
 </I

 
  Introduction 

   In 1984 Shirley Ittas, a faculty secretary in the film department at York University in Toronto, worked a 35-hour week for $15,745 per year.  Shirley's job requirements were many and complex: 

  she uses her judgement as well as her clerical skills.  There are many hectic days when students need quick responses.  In fielding inquiries, providing information about the department's regulations and courses, sorting out hundreds of portfolios and grades for evaluation, she believes she affects student's lives.  

   Shirley was paid $8.65 per hour.  The groundskeepers at York were getting $9.19 per hour.  Was Shirley being paid fairly in comparison with the groundskeepers?  She certainly didn't think so: 

  'I didn't feel angry that they [the groundskeepers] were earning a certain amount of money.  I felt angry I was paid less.  I do have a lot of responsibility and I think my contribution is as valuable as their contribution, and my salary should be at least equal ....  My job is important.' 

   PURPOSE  

   Investigation into the income differences between women and men has been dominated by three types of studies: quantitative estimations by economists and sociologists of the components of the gendered wage gap;  There have been virtually no analyses of the dynamic political struggles along class and gender lines over the formulation of legislation on equal pay for equal work, or equal pay for work of equal value. 

   The purpose of this book is to examine the three basic areas in which the political struggles over pay equity have been waged.  These are the paid capitalist workplace (offices and factories), the capital and labour marketplace (where jobs are obtained in exchange for wages), and the household workplace (where the work involved in bearing and raising children is performed).  Most of the examples in this book are drawn from the federal levels in Canada and the United States, the provinces of Manitoba and Ontario, and, to a lesser extent, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. 

   The first thesis of this book is that in both countries a coalition of business and neo-conservative anti-feminist organizations has opposed equal pay for work of equal value by seeking to restrict questions of gender-based income to non-discriminatory factors in the household and marketplace, and to prevent state intervention in the capitalist workplace and marketplace.  At the same time, a feminist-labour alliance of women's organizations and trade unions has supported state intervention in the form of equal pay for work of equal value by struggling to place responsibility for unequal pay on the shoulders of employers in the workplace, who by their discriminatory hiring and promotion practices have, in effect, taken advantage of women's double day of labour in the household and the paid labour force.  The polar-opposite participants in these struggles have been activist trade-union and new middle-class women on the one side and senior corporate executive men on the other.  Corporate women have leaned towards gender rather than class in supporting pay equity, though not without some compromise with their privileged class position.  After decades of socialization into patriarchal ideologies; trade-union men have leaned towards gender and class interests to support equal-pay legislation, though not without a painful struggle with their sister unionists.  In danger of being left out of the struggle over pay equity altogether, men in the new middle class of professionals, managers, and intelligentsia in both the public and private sectors have been pulled towards both sides.  This split has been especially evident among male economists, corporate consultants, lawyers, media writers, and state bureaucrats, although their centre of gravity, especially in the United States, appears to have shifted somewhat to an ideological defence of the male business-class position.  

   Anti-feminists and neo-conservatives have feared that the hidden agenda in the campaign for equal pay for work of equal value is the destruction of the patriarchal nuclear family.  Giving women pay equivalent to men's would make them less dependent on men, loosen their ties to the home, and provide them with greater incentive to pursue careers outside.  It has therefore been important for anti-feminist neo-conservatives to maintain the traditional separation between the public sphere of the state, the capitalist workplace, and the marketplace, and the private sphere of the household, since they see the labour and women's movements as attempting to link them in assessing the causes of, and recommending the solutions to, unequal pay.  The irony is that feminist and labour organizations have not forcefully made such links between the private and public spheres, even though they have often been made by both socialist and radical feminists. 

   In each of the three areas of struggle (paid workplace, marketplace, and household workplace), the focal points are class and gender.  A third issue, race / ethnicity, has often been pushed into the background  A dialectical relation exists between the structures and struggles of class, gender, and race / ethnicity: even though the structuring of class, gender, and race / ethnicity imposes limits on the kinds of struggles that can emerge, class, feminist, and anti-racist struggles may set the agenda as to the content of structural changes that will occur through equal-pay legislation.  For example, the structural differences in wealth between white businessmen and visible-minority working-class women has meant that the former could use high-priced lawyers and consultants in lobbying governments over pay equity while the latter could not.  Structure thus places limits on struggles.  At the same time, the struggle by trade unions and working-class women's organizations to ensure that pay equity is not achieved simply by lowering the wages of men has put so much pressure on governments that they have inserted clauses in pay-equity acts forbidding employers to lower men's wages to equalize the pay between women and men.  Thus struggles affect the content of structural changes in women's and men's wages.  As noted in Appendix A, in the 1980s the women's movement has become much more conscious of racism both in the broader society and within itself.  But business and neo-conservative elements within the new middle class have sought to exploit racial and ethnic (as well as gender) divisions in both the women's movement and the labour movement in order to divide the solidarity of the campaign for a political solution to gender-based unequal pay.  Trade unions and visible-minority women's organizations have fought back by minimizing their internal racial, gender, and class differences. 

   Using Gramsci's concept of 'passive revolution', a second thesis will be suggested in Chapter 5: that (a) racist and anti-feminist neo-conservative elements, reacting to a perceived threat to the patriarchal nuclear household from the labour-feminist alliance, have tried to fracture the solidarity of the labour and women's movements along the lines of classism, racism, and sexism; and (b) patriarchal capitalist states have tried to co-opt these movements by framing weak pay-equity legislation containing numerous loopholes and defects that make it difficult for women to win pay-equity adjustments.  The legislation of equal pay for work of equal value, although a victory for feminists and trade unionists, also represents an attempt on the part of the state to co-opt the labour and women's movements not only on behalf of business, anti-feminist, and neo-conservative interests, but at their behest. 

   CAVEATS  

   Six caveats are in order here.  First, this book deals almost exclusively with those jurisdictions where equal-pay-for-work-of-equal-value legislation is now in place.  It does not examine the lack of such legislation in Alberta, British Columbia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and Saskatchewan.  And it pays only cursory attention to developments in Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia, both of which legislated equal pay for work of equal value in the public sector in 1988, and in Quebec, which legislated proactive equal value in its human-rights law of 1975. 

   Second, although it is possible to analytically separate the components of the gendered wage gap in terms of workplace, marketplace, and household, those three areas overlap considerably: together they form a triangle, with each merely an extension of the other two. 

   Third, the intricacies of the strategies negotiated between women's groups and labour organizations, and the gender tensions between them, are not dealt with in detail in this book.  That is a separate research project requiring intensive in-depth interviewing of participants in both kinds of organizations as they develop their respective tactics in the fight for pay equity. 

   Fourth, the intricate process of collective bargaining over the setting up of job-evaluation and pay-equity plans - in other words, the implementation of legislation, once it is on the statute books - is not discussed.  This is another subject that requires a separate project, based, again, on in-depth interviewing of participants in the process. 

   The fifth caveat concerns 'class'.  Although working-class trade-union organizations have clashed with business-class associations over the shape of pay-equity legislation, there is a sense in which class has not been a consideration.  Framers of pay-equity legislation have tended to ignore the question not only of ethnic and racial differences, but also of class differences, in favour of an exclusive emphasis on gender differences in rates of pay.  There has been little discussion of the value of working-class labour compared to that of the work performed by managers and employers, the class superiors of workers.  In a retrospective critical examination of equal pay for work of equal value, George Ehring, legislative assistant in the NDP caucus of the Ontario legislature, observed: 'What we really need is a mechanism that compares the relative value of the work performed by secretaries, childcare workers and hair-dressers with that of their bosses.'  

   The sixth caveat is the most difficult to discuss.  There is considerable ambiguity in the literature as to the precise meanings of 'equal pay', 'equal work','equal value', 'equivalent value', 'comparable worth', and 'pay equity'.  'Equal work' is based on comparisons between jobs that are identical.  'similar work' depends on comparisons between jobs that are similar or substantially similar.  'Equal value' or, to use the American term, 'comparable worth', is based on comparisons between jobs that may be quite dissimilar but that can be equated in terms of a composite of effort, skill, responsibility, and working conditions (some subdimensions of these four factors are listed in Appendix B).  The ambiguity in the use of these terms reflects in part the nature of class and feminist struggles as business and anti-feminists attempt to restrict the meaning of pay equity to equal pay for identical or similar work, while labourites and feminists attempt to broaden the term to include equal pay for work of equal or comparable value. 

   The Vancouver Women's Resource Centre has raised the question of whether the state has used the term 'pay equity' - rather than the more potent 'equal pay for work of equal value' - to co-opt or defeat the feminist drive for truly equivalent wages between women and men.  One example might be the use of 'pay equity' in the 1987 Ontario Pay Equity Act, which went into effect on 1 Jan. 1988.  Why would the state, after passing a pay-equity act incorporating the equal-value principle, now point to a difference between pay equity and equal pay for work of equal value?  Why would it now raise the issue of non-gender grounds of discrimination when it always resisted extending pay equity to these areas?  Is the reason to reassure business and neo-conservatives that the provincial state has not, in fact, implemented equal pay for work of equal value?  Or is the state now agreeing with women-of-colour organizations that equal pay for work of equal value should be implemented on non-gender cultural grounds as well?  </I

   CHAPTER 4 

  Types of Groups

   Political science assumes that sound analysis has to be built on categorization.  Without having defined what we are studying we cannot observe it, measure it, or describe it - and therefore we cannot make verifiable general statements about it.  This chapter will look at the progress - or lack of progress - that political scientists have made in building a system of categories to investigate the relationship between a country's general political system and the pressure groups that work within it.  We will also suggest a taxonomy of our own. 

  CATEGORIZING GROUPS 

   Pressure group studies boast remarkably few efforts to build systems for categorization (also known as typologies or taxonomies).  Perhaps this is because it is quite easy to identify and to study formal interest groups that indisputably fit a broad definition, such as the one presented in the first chapter, once one has been agreed upon.  Pressure groups are clearly not political parties (they seek influence, not power), not government agencies (they make their own decisions and appoint their own officers), and not even interests (they are defined as being formal associations).  Scholars may quarrel over marginal cases, but the broad category, pressure groups, is generally recognized.  Consequently the literature is full of case studies - many of them excellent - of particular groups and observations of groups engaged in various phases of pressure politics.  There is even a growing number of empirical studies of groups that are clearly alike, such as business interest associations. 

   These studies tell us a lot about how groups have adapted to different political systems and have exercised influence.  They are not, however, very helpful when we try to develop general theories of political life.  They do not help us make verifiable generalizations about the political behaviour of organized groups, about their relationship to the state, or about their role in political systems, and it is very hard to set out a grand theory that does not include such generalizations.  Of course, political scientists, myself included, have succumbed to the temptation to propose grand theories, but we all know that these theories are little more than informed speculation, flawed because the studies on which they are based are not comparable.  While such studies generally share a common definition of the term 'interest / pressure group' - although even here, as we have seen, differences persist - there is only rudimentary agreement about the kinds of interest groups that are to he found.  This prevents us from understanding why very different kinds of pressure groups emerge, why their behaviour varies, and why some groups appear to be more influential than others. 

   Before exploring these issues more fully, it is useful to review the principles that guide categorization.  We can apply those principles to some of the rudimentary typologies that have been used in studying pressure groups, and use them to build a system of categories of our own.  The principles we shall draw upon, which have been widely used in the social sciences, can he expressed as five rules: 

   Rule l: Pertinence.  

   The categories must be set up to address an explicitly defined research problem.  For example, John E. Chubb, in Interest Groups and the Bureaucracy, divides the groups in his study of California energy politics into two categories: cost-bearers and beneficiaries.  This approach is pertinent to a case study that tries to explain group behaviour in a single policy dispute, but it would not help us classify interest groups in general because groups are seldom consistently cost-bearers or beneficiaries.  In other words, the categories may vary a good deal according to our research interests, but it is important to ensure that they are appropriate to the research question being addressed. 

   Rule 2: Exhaustiveness.  

   The categories should take into account every type of group that exists in the system under study.  If we want to study the pressure group system in a country, we cannot be content with a typology that captures only business, women's, or religious groups. 

   Rule 3: Exclusiveness.  

   The categories should be mutually exclusive and independent.  This is a most difficult requirement, but it is essential since it forces us to discriminate between groups and allows us to explore their differences.  The distinction between 'public interest groups' and'special interest groups' is popular because a public interest can be distinguished from a private, or special, interest.  On the other hand, even though a distinction between 'lobby' groups and 'protest' groups is equally popular because it evokes colourful images of the different behaviour of the 'ins' and the 'outs', the distinction is not helpful analytically.  This is because so-called 'protest' groups often lobby and occasionally even powerful lobby groups protest.  The activities of protesting and lobbying, in other words, do not consistently differentiate groups. 

   Rule 4: One category / one principle.  

   We cannot build individual categories by combining characteristics that have been established on the basis of different principles.  For example, when we refer to organizations as 'business', 'environmental', or 'civil rights' groups we are implicitly using a single principle to differentiate them.  In this case, we are sorting them out according to their central objectives, which we have concluded are to promote business, or environmental concerns, or the protection of civil rights.  Suppose that we tried to combine this principle with another one: the level of organizational complexity attained by each group.  How would we do it?  Would we say that all business groups are highly organized and all environmental groups not?  If we were to do so, how would we categorize Greenpeace, which, with its extensive international network, is a highly complex environmental group - probably more complex than most business interest associations.  Clearly, by combining two different methods of distinguishing groups we make the task of sorting them out much more difficult, if not impossible.  We would be better off if we analysed one category in terms of another; we could look at protest groups, for example, to determine how many are highly organized, weakly organized, and so on. 

   Rule 5: Respect the level of analysis.  

   Each set of categories enables us to carry out analysis at a specific level.  A set of categories designed to study the pressure groups operating in a particular policy field will not help us examine the efforts made by political parties, lobbying firms, corporations, officials, and individuals to influence those policies.  To do that, we would have to move to the next level of analysis, the policy system, and to employ a new set of analytical tools.  

   How well do our categories for pressure groups adhere to these rules?  When we set out to distinguish pressure groups from other political actors we seem to be on firm ground.  The distinctions drawn between pressure groups, parties, government agencies, and so on in Chapter 1 have been generally accepted for a number of years and have helped keep us from violating the level of analysis precepts of Rule 5.  Similarly, we have learned to distinguish between the three types of interests - latent, solidary, and organized or formal - and to maintain a clear distinction in analysis between organized groups and the other two types.  

   When we attempt to distinguish between organized pressure groups we run into trouble, largely because we tend to ignore our first rule of categorization.  We do not keep in mind the research questions that different methods of categorization are designed to address.  Consequently we often fall into the trap of using a category designed to explore one question to address others.  Equally, there is a danger of criticizing a typology developed for one purpose simply because it does not address another.  To ensure that the following critique avoids this trap, we will briefly consider the research question that a general typology should address. 

   The questions at the heart of political science have to do with power, specifically, the power of the state - what it consists of, how it is used, who gets to use it, when and where.  Pressure groups, by definition, do not seek to use state power directly, but rather to influence it.  Consequently, the broadest and central questions that political scientists ask when they study pressure groups have to do with how groups exert influence and how their efforts are received by the state.  In short, they are most concerned with the relationship between the state and pressure groups.  There are, of course, many other questions political scientists ask about pressure groups - questions about how groups determine which issues they will pursue and about the effect membership characteristics and opinions have on group behaviour, for example - but the core questions have to do with state / group relations and all others are subsidiary.  Any method of classification intended for general use in political analysis should be designed to address this central concern.  Guided by this conclusion, the critique that follows is intended to assess the capacity of widely used typologies to assist our explorations of the core questions of political science.  It should be remembered that typologies shown to be inadequate for this level of analysis may be extremely useful in addressing other questions. 

   Two methods of categorization are popular with academics, journalists, and interest group members themselves.  The first divides organized groups according to their objectives - protest, environmental, civil rights, and public interest groups, to name a few.  Collectively those groups that pursue public-regarding objectives are often referred to as 'public interest' groups, while those that attend to the exclusive and generally material benefits of their members are often labelled'special interest' groups.  The second classifies by the character of the members - business, ethnic, or women's groups for example. 

   Research that applies this two-fold division of groups shows that it fails to conform to two of our five rules of categorization, and therefore fails as a typology.  It does not meet the requirement for exclusiveness or the requirement that a category should be based on a single principle.  Some scholars assure us that despite the considerable overlap between groups that fall into the material benefit category and those designated as attitude groups, 'one is able to assign a group to one or the other category quite easily'.  This is not in fact the case.  It is extremely difficult to show that there are characteristics unique to groups in each category. 

   A good illustration is found in Jeffrey Berry's survey of 83 public interest groups based in Washington in the early 1970s and his case studies of two of them.  These studies show that when groups focus exclusively on public interest objectives, they tend to experience problems of organization, access, and resource mobilization, and that these circumstances generally lead them to use some pressure strategies - such as publicity, confrontation, and litigation - rather than others, like consultation and co-operation.  However, if we compare Berry's findings with research into material benefit groups, we discover similar characteristics.  Business interest associations are more likely to use consultation and co-operation rather than publicity and confrontation, but they may still use the latter techniques.  Organizational characteristics are more likely to be distinct.  Business interest groups tend to be better developed organizationally and to have more extensive membership participation in policy-making than public interest groups, while public interest groups are more likely to have been created by individuals whose charisma and entrepreneurial skills keep them alive and draw media attention to their causes.  Even on this dimension, however, it is possible to find public interest groups that are more fully developed than many business groups and others that encourage membership participation.  We have to conclude, then, that we cannot create water-tight divisions between groups by associating material benefit objectives with one category of group and altruistic objectives with the others.  
 </I

   The Role and Nature of Conventions 

   The Canadian political system is shaped by a wide variety of constitutional rules that go well beyond the provisions of our formal Constitution.  While section 52 of the 1982 Constitution Act declares that some two dozen British and Canadian statutes and orders-in-council comprise our Constitution, and are the'supreme law of Canada', Canadian constitutional law also includes many other legal rules found in statutes, orders-in-council, and judicial decisions relating to the executive, the judiciary, and the legislature.  But even when they are added to the Constitution, we have only an incomplete and distorted view of our political system.  The whole constitution is actually composed of three elements: the formal Constitution; the legal rules relating to the three branches of government; and, in addition, vitally important informal rules, called conventions, that have arisen through political practice.  As many areas of the constitution are structured by archaic or incomplete laws, the political arena has given birth to binding conventions and customary usages that not only direct political actors in these matters, but ultimately determine the full substance and character of the Canadian constitution.  Even the 'supreme law' of the Constitution is often remoulded by the force of conventions, which both complete the constitution and allow it to evolve with changes in prevailing values. 

   Every major aspect of the constitution depends on conventions.  The sweeping legal powers of the Governor General are transferred by convention to the Cabinet.  The very basis of responsible government - with the requirements that both individual ministers and the Cabinet collectively must account to the legislature for the activities of the executive branch of government - is a vital matter that has been entirely left out of the formal Constitution.  Both the operation of disciplined parties, which give the basic character to our legislatures, and the relationship between the House of Commons and the Senate, are similarly determined by convention.  Many of the rules giving effect to the federal principle have arisen from political practice rather than from the formal division of powers, found in the original Constitution Act of 1867 and in subsequent judicial pronouncements.  The basic independence of the judiciary has grown to a large extent out of informal rules as well as legal guarantees. 

   With the role conventions play in transforming the formal Constitution, it is crucial to have a full appreciation of the manner in which the legal and conventional rules of the constitution interact.  Perhaps the greatest weakness of traditional examinations of the Canadian constitution is the over-simplification of both the character of constitutional conventions and their relationship with the positive laws of the constitution. 

   Two distinct and somewhat contradictory trends relating to constitutional conventions appear to be at play in Canada.  One tendency is to draw a clear boundary between law and convention.  In its opinions on the 1981 reference questions about the amendment of the Constitution, the Supreme Court of Canada drew a sharp distinction between conventions, as political rules, and the legal rules enforced by the courts.  The majority summarized their views with the formula: 'Constitutional conventions plus constitutional law equal the total constitution of the country.'  Although this statement illustrates the importance of conventions, it drastically oversimplifies the variety of rules that make up the constitution, as well as how they interrelate. 

   The second major trend lies in an increasing propensity to seek the legal regulation or judicial resolution of issues normally governed by convention.  The justiciability of conventions may become an increasingly important issue in Canadian constitutional theory.  Peter Russell has noted that Canadian political culture has become more litigious in recent decades, with legal solutions sought for political disputes.  The inclination to seek a legal resolution of matters involving conventions was further exemplified after the 1985 general election in Ontario.  When the Liberals and the New Democratic Party announced they had reached an agreement ensuring that the NDP would support a Liberal government for two years, Premier Frank Miller immediately sought legal advice about whether this agreement could be challenged in the courts - even though it clearly related only to matters governed by convention.  For his part, Lieutenant Governor John B. Aird consulted with a noted constitutional lawyer, J.J. Robinette, about the avenues of action open to him.  Thus a trend seems to be developing where legal solutions are sought for problems involving conventions. 

   The outcome of these two trends should be of great interest to students of the Canadian constitution.  If conventional rules come to inhabit some legal dimension, there may be significant consequences for the constitutional process.  Any increased propensity to seek judicial remedies for matters involving conventions could further enhance the power of the judiciary to regulate the activities of elected officials.  Some concern might be expressed at this prospect, since conventions have always represented a valued method by which a constitution may evolve informally through the actions of politicians who both respond and are accountable to the electorate.  If conventions become increasingly justiciable, there is some danger that the democratic quality of constitutional evolution might be eroded.  On the other hand, too clear a boundary between court-enforceable constitutional laws and conventional rules might see the courts enforcing outdated rules that not only lack any political legitimacy but may also be destructive. 

  THE NATURE OF CONVENTIONS 

   In the interests of clarity, a working definition of conventions is needed before proceeding further.  What exactly is meant by a constitutional convention may be most easily explained by citing the formulation of Geoffrey Marshall and Graeme Moodie: 

  By conventions of the constitution, we mean binding rules of constitutional behaviour which are considered to be binding by and upon those who operate the Constitution, but which are not enforced by the law courts (although the courts may recognise their existence), nor by the presiding officers in the Houses of Parliament.  

   Curiously few Canadian writers have ventured their own definitions of conventions.  Eugene Forsey calls them 'the acknowledged, binding, extra-legal customs, usages, practices and understandings by which our system of government operates.'  Both of these definitions, however, fail to distinguish conventions from the 'laws and customs of Parliament', a distinction insisted upon by most British authors. 

   Despite the importance of conventions to the Canadian constitution, surprisingly little has been written on the subject by Canadian scholars.  Canadian constitutional lawyers seldom seem to give much attention to the topic, perhaps heeding A.V. Dicey's injunction of over a century ago that the subject of conventions 'is not one of law but of politics, and need trouble no lawyer or the class of any professor of law.'  In general, however, much of the discussion in the Canadian literature has focused over the years on the terms of particular conventions.  Very little attention has been paid by Canadian scholars to the nature of conventions and how they may relate to other constitutional rules. 

   The most rigorous discussions of constitutional theory and the nature of conventions may be found in a number of works by British scholars.  Dicey  

   The distinction between law and convention is often implicitly treated by constitutional writers as dating from A.V. Dicey's An Introduction to the Law of the Constitution, first published in 1885.  Certainly Dicey's examination of conventional rules was more thorough than any previous work and has come to be one of the leading texts in British constitutional theory.  However, scholarly attention to the difference between the legal rules and the political practices and principles of the constitution predates Dicey's work considerably.  Hood Phillips has detailed the evolution of British constitutional theory and the growing distinction made between law and political practice.  The existence of these two types of rules was noted by Edmund Burke in the eighteenth century and was progressively expanded upon by later authors.  But Dicey laid much of the foundation of modern constitutional theory when he drew a fundamental distinction between 

 'the law of the constitution', which, consisting (as it does) of rules enforced or recognised by the courts, makes up a body of 'law' in the proper sense of that term, and the 'conventions of the constitution', which, consisting (as they do) of customs, practices, maxims, or precepts which are not enforced or recognised by the courts, make up a body not of laws, but of constitutional or political ethics ...   

  Dicey's clear separation of law and convention, on the grounds of court-enforceability, has been a pervasive element in theories of constitutional law ever since. 

   There is a clear consensus among scholars since Dicey's time about the general purposes that conventions serve.  Their main function is to allow the exercise of legal powers in some manner other than that prescribed by the letter of the law.  As Jennings put it, '... they provide the flesh which clothes the dry bones of the law.'  Some conventions stipulate that the powers of a certain office be exercised only in certain circumstances; for example, the Governor General's power of dissolution is limited to a few situations.  Other conventions ensure that one actor's legal power is effectively exercised in practice by someone else; thus much of the prerogative power of the Crown is determined exclusively by Cabinet rather than by the monarch.  Finally, a few conventions negate some existing legal power or duty; for instance, a convention now releases the Governor General from the duty imposed in s.56 of the 1867 Constitution Act to send copies to the Queen of all federal legislation enacted into law.  The primary benefit of these functions of conventions is that they permit the adaptation of constitutional rules to changes in the general political principles and values of the day, without the need for formal amendment of existing positive law. 

   There is, however, some uncertainty over how conventions come to be established and how they may be identified.  Moreover, there is a fundamental division of opinion concerning the legal character of conventions.  The near dichotomy that Dicey drew is both hotly defended and criticized. 

  LAW AND CONVENTION 

   Dicey set the battle-lines for a continuing debate on the nature of conventions in 1885, when he declared that conventions 'are not in reality laws at all since they are not enforced by the Courts.'  Laws are enforced in the courts, while conventions are said to be enforced in the political arena alone; this is the essence of the distinction made between law and convention. 

   Some authors, however, have taken issue with the neatness of this dividing line.  Jennings has been the most influential constitutional theorist to argue that conventions are not so easily separated from legal rules as the judicial-enforcement test implies.  He has claimed that, in their substance, laws and conventions are often inextricably interrelated;  Although both authors willingly point out certain differences between law and convention, neither would accept Dicey's assertion that these rules are 'of a totally different character.' 

   The main bone of contention between these two schools of thought is the role conventions may play in judicial proceedings.  The debate focuses not only on the more empirical question of how judges have treated conventions, but also on the normative issue of how the courts should treat them.  </I

    The Capitalist Workplace 

   The struggle over pay equity has affected most centrally the capitalist workplace: the offices, factories, and mines where women and men are employed to earn a measure of subsistence so that others may profit by their labour.  Changes in the capitalist labour process (the way tools and equipment are combined with labour to produce commodities) have interacted with the way wages are divided up between women and men.  This interaction occurs in three ways.  First, under the strongest pro-active versions of  'equal pay for work of equal value' , employers and union bargaining agents are mandated to negotiate pay-equity plans in the capitalist workplace itself.  These plans attempt to define more precisely the value of work and how it is divided up between women and men.  Second, unions interpret pay-equity legislation as holding out the possibility of increasing their control over the labour process, while employers regard such legislation as a threat to their control.  Where unions have not existed in particular workplaces (and this has been typical for women), pay-equity plans reaffirm managerial control over workers by giving employers the right to unilaterally impose their own desired form of pay equity, subject to the approval of state pay-equity commis  sions or bureaus.  Third, both unions and employers have con  tended that pay equity would have long-reaching implications for the structure of work.  The labour-feminist alliance has argued that pay equity would increase the productivity of women by making them more satisfied with their level of monetary compensation; managers and employers have argued that equal pay for work of equal value would lead to a restructuring of the labour process in the direction of more part-time work, more subcontracting of work, and faster replacement of intensive labour with labour-saving technology.  It will be argued in this chapter that the labour-feminist affiance has invited state intervention in the capitalist workplace primarily to redress women's lower wages, but in a form that would increase the control by women workers and unions over the labour process, while business has opposed state intervention in the paid workplace for this very reason. 

   MODELS: COMPLAINT, PRO-ACTIVE, INTEGRATED 

   There are three main pay-equity models: complaint, employer-in  itiated or pro-active, and integrated.  In the  complaint  model, com  mon in human-rights legislation, women employees are entitled to file complaints alleging that their jobs are not being paid on a basis equal to similar or comparable male jobs.  This method exists in the 1978 Canadian Human Rights Act, the Employment Stand  ards Acts of Manitoba and Ontario, and the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms enacted in 1975.  The  employer-initiated  or  pro-active  model requires the implementation of job-evaluation and pay-equity plans by the employer in non-unionized establishments and jointly by employees and employers through collective bargaining in unionized workplaces.  This model is prominent in the legislation of Min  nesota in the US, the Manitoba Pay Equity Act of 1985 (where disputes are referred to arbitration or the labour board), and the 1988 Nova Scotia Pay Equity Act (which has no dispute-settlement mechanism).  The  integrated  model provides for combinations of the complaint and pro-active models.  This was the approach adopted in the 1986 Ontario Public Service Pay Equity Bill, the 1987 Ontario Pay Equity Act, and the 1988 Prince Edward Island Pay Equity Act: the pro-active model is effective in an initial phase, when employers and employees are to negotiate a pay-equity plan; later, complaints could be lodged for failure to comply with the plan.  Complaints may be made only about contraventions of the acts and are limited to how the acts define pay equity, its implementation, restrictions, and exemptions.  A fully-integrated act would not impose such restrictions on the complaints that could be lodged.   1    Generally, business and the neo-conservatives, if they had to accept any type of equal-pay legislation, favoured the complaint model,   2   or one based on  'voluntary compliance' , in which it was left up to employers to decide how best to equalize wages.   3    Managers and personnel officers in the new middle class fell in line with this position.   4    The feminist-labour alliance, on the other hand, favoured the pro-active model either by itself or in combination with the complaint procedure in the integration model.  The Equal Pay Coalition of Ontario came up with a rela  tively innovative plan: the pro-active setting-up of pay-equity plans was to apply only to unionized workplaces and workplaces with 100 employees or more; workplaces with fewer than 100 employees and unorganized workplaces would only have to fol  low the complaint model.   5   

   COVERAGE 

   In several national, Canadian provincial, and US state jurisdic  tions there are three issues variously at stake regarding the coverage of women by pay-equity legislation:  gender predominance , (should job comparisons be made between female-dominated and male-dominated jobs, or between all jobs, regardless of their gender composition?);  establishment  (should job comparisons be made only within a single establishment of the same employer, or between establishments of the same and / or different employers?); and  sector  (should the legislation apply only to the public sector, or a subpart of that sector, or to the private sector as well?).  Business has wanted to exclude as many women as pos  sible from coverage, while feminist and trade-union organizations have wanted the broadest possible coverage.  Each issue will be discussed in turn. 

     1. Gender predominance   

   In pro-active and integrated pay-equity legislation, gender predominance is usually specified, so that the law covers only  'women's positions' , or those occupied mainly by women.  The 1985 Manitoba Pay Equity Act applies only to those jobs in the public sector in which 70 per cent or more are women; com  parisons can be made only with those jobs in which 70 per cent or more of the occupants are men.  These levels can be changed through negotiations between employers and employees.   6    The 1988 Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island Pay Equity Acts define both female and male predominance at the 60 per cent level.   7    In the Ontario  Green Paper on Pay Equity  it was suggested that pay-equity adjustments could be carried out only by compar  ing female-predominant with male-predominant jobs, but the question of determining gender predominance was left open.  A number of methods from other jurisdictions were discussed: a sliding scale of 55 to 70 per cent, based on the number of employees per establishment, proposed by the Canadian Human Rights Commission; a statistical formula proposed by a com  parable-worth commission in New York State; consideration of historical patterns, especially in those occupations that were once female-predominant and consequently still receive low pay; or the arbitrary 70 per cent cut-off figure plus the possibility of negotiat  ing other levels, as in the Manitoba legislation.   8     The Ontario Public Service Pay Equity bill and the 1987 Ontario Pay Equity Act provide for a 70 per cent cut-off for predominantly male jobs and a 60 per cent cut-off for predominantly female jobs unless these levels are changed through negotiation between employers and employees.   9    In many complaint-based human-rights and employ  ment-standards acts, gender predominance is not formally defined or acknowledged.   10    However, in 1978 a Canadian Human Rights Commission (  CHRC ) Task Force recognized the issue of gender predominance in the case of group complaints.   11    In November 1986, the  CHRC  accepted a sliding scale based on the number of employees in an occupational group to determine gender predominance.   12    The cut-offs were as follows: fewer than 100 employees, 70 per cent; 100 to 500, 60 per cent; and more than 500, 55 per cent.   13    In smaller occupational groups, because the cut-off is higher, there is a greater chance that women will not qualify for equal-pay adjustments.  Regardless of group size, the Canadian Human Rights Act applies to all persons in each occupa  tion.  It does not have the minimum-of-ten threshold found in the 1985 Manitoba and 1988 Nova Scotia Acts. 

    (a) The business position  

   Business interests have either rejected any definition of gender predominance or wanted the cut-off to be set as high as possible and made inflexible, so that very few women qualify for pay-equi  ty adjustments.  In Canada in 1986 the Automotive Parts Manufac  turers Association opposed defining gender predominance in any way.   14    The Ontario Chamber of Commerce thought that the 60 per cent to 70 per cent contemplated by the government was too low, and wanted the levels for both male- and female-predominant jobs established at between 80 and 90 per cent.   15    Other business as  sociations wanted a level higher than the 60 to 70 per cent range without specifying exact percentages.   16    Such employer groups as the Ontario Mining Association, Ontario Hydro, the Municipal Electric Association, and the Canadian  Manufacturers'  Associa  tion took the less extreme position of favouring the 70 per cent cut-off level.   17    The Board of Trade of Metropolitan Toronto wanted to have a phase-in period for gender predominance: during the first year of pay equity, the threshold for male- and female-predominant jobs would be set at 90 per cent, to fall 5 per cent in each subsequent year until it reached a 70 per cent plateau.  To avoid the uncertain effects of fluctuations in the thresholds, it recommended a three-year stabilization period before a level could be established, and wanted a ban on any negotiations between unions and management to reduce the figure below 70 per cent.   18    The Day Care Advisory Committee of Metropolitan Toronto, which on other issues leaned more towards the business position than the feminist one, favoured a 50 per cent threshold for female predominance on the grounds that women's participa  tion rate in the labour force would soon reach this level.   19    The  Manufacturers'  Association also wanted the 70 per cent figure, which it favoured, to be non-negotiable and applicable to groups of no less than 10 employees, with  'group'  defined as  'occupation  al type rather than evaluated grade level' , and a three-year stabilization period.   20   

   (b) The labour-feminist position  

   In the Ontario and Manitoba debates, the feminist-labour alliance mounted seven responses to the neo-conservative business ap  proach to gender predominance. 

    NO CUT-OFF .  As one option, many in the feminist-labour alliance rejected completely any automatic numerical cut-off figure, whether applied to female- or male-predominant jobs.   21    The On  tario Equal Pay Coalition stated its objection graphically:   'A fixed percentage could work like a guillotine and automatically exclude large numbers of women who deserve the right to file a com  plaint.'    22     The National Action Committee on the Status of Women warned that automatic cut-off figures for gender predominance would give employers grounds to launch court appeals under the Canadian Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, resulting in years of delays in implementing pay equity.   23    The Public Service Alliance of Canada argued that  'any threshold level that restricts the initiation of a complaint is a direct violation of Section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms' .   24   

    LOWER CUT-OFF .  As another option, several feminist and labour organizations suggested lower numerical figures than 70 per cent in the determination of gender predominance.  The Charter of Rights Coalition in Manitoba and the Manitoba Association of Woman and the Law suggested a 60 per cent figure for both female- and male-dominated jobs.   25    Organized Working Women, and Ontario Equal Pay Coalition, the Ontario Coalition for Better Daycare, and the Federal of Women  Teachers'  Association of Ontario suggested that, since women make up 44 per cent of the labour force, gender the predominance should be set at a level just above this figure.   26   

    FLEXIBILITY .  Trade unions and feminist groups wanted as much flexibility as possible in the determination of gender predominance.   27    In particular, they said, sex stereotypes and the historical patterns of gender predominance should be taken into account.   28    For example, some low-paying occupations that are now dominated by men were once dominated by women, and this historical pattern has influenced current wages.   29    Women in such occupations should be able to qualify for the pay-equity adjustments despite the fact that they are not in female-predominant jobs.   30    The Ontario Equal Pay Coalition suggested a dual approach to gender predominance: in the pro-active setting-up of pay-equity plans, use a flexible approach that takes into account historical patterns and sex stereotyping of some occupations; in the complaint pro  cedure, abandon the notion of gender predominance completely.   31   

    COLLECTIVE BARGAINING .  Trade unions more than feminist or  ganizations pushed for the determination of gender predominance through collective bargaining rather than unilaterally, by management fiat.   32    Although many feminist or  ganizations accepted collective bargaining as a means to achieve pay equity, some were suspicious of male domination in negotia  tions, resulting in the dropping of  'women's issues'  (such as child care or affirmative action) from packages presented to employers in favour of general wage and benefits increases desired by male majorities in many unions. 
 