   VICTORIA: Now a world-beater  
  Text by Laura Langston

   Something drastic has happened to Victoria, Old Chap.  It's simply not the same city it was just a few years ago.  Not so much the "bit of England," not even, anymore, the retirement capital of Canada.  The adjectives travel writers love to apply to Victoria - quaint, idyllic, old-world - don't quite do anymore.  Victoria has become more complex than that.  Mix in more adjectives like stylish, exhilarating, imaginative.  Then you will have more of an idea of a city breaking out of its mold while trying not to leave behind what always made it so appealing.  Then say it has the most pleasant environment in the world, as a major U.S.-based travel publication just proclaimed. 

   Victoria, British Columbia's capital city, is humming.  Millions of dollars are pouring in for beautification, restoration, and development.  Thousands of people are coming to stay, not necessarily to retire. 

   It was only a matter of time that this loveliest of cities, massaged by a gentle climate on the southern tip of a huge Pacific island, would start to burgeon. 

   In losing its predictable image, some residents worry that Victoria's soul is vanishing with it.  Others say the winds of change are reviving its spirit. 

   "The task before us now is to marry growth and preservation and do it creatively, in a way that adds to the quality of our city", says building designer Chris Gower.  "We must have pride in who we are, but we must have vision, too." 

   More than ever, the holidayers are coming: 2.5 million of them last year.  On the streets above the harbor, summer tourists, cameras dangling, brochures in hand, crowd onto double-decker buses and horse-drawn caravans for tours of the city.  Breaking out of its cliche-ridden mold, a quickly growing city begins to hum with energy.  Pedal-powered kabuki cabs weave through the traffic, people pose beside a kilted bagpiper playing on a corner.  The harbor's abuzz with floatplanes, jet-propelled catamarans, yachts, tour boats, and a stray kayaker dipping about.  People constantly drift back between harborside, the Empress Hotel, the B.C. Legislative Buildings, and the Royal Provincial Museum.  Or they head up Government Street for the shops, restaurants, and sidewalk cafes. 

   Victoria always has been a town for lingering, for strolling.  But recent development has stepped up the tempo and brought a "big city" feel. 

   It is no longer the retirement capital of Canada, a place on the southern tip of Vancouver Island where prairie farmers come to visit their parents.  Victoria, which for years had the country's highest population of senior citizens, now has fallen behind Halifax and other Canadian communities as a retirement centre. 

   While the bustle of downtown is most noticeable with the annual torrent of tourists, the new growth throughout Greater Victoria is prevalent year-round.  Farms on the once pastoral Saanich Peninsula are rapidly becoming new residential and commercial subdivisions.  The rural western communities of Colwood, View Royal, and Metchosin now are incorporated municipalities. 

   As we enter the 1990s, Victoria's population is nearly 270,000, an increase of more than 110,000 since the early '60s.  Major expansions of the Trans-Canada and Patricia Bay Highways - the city's main commuter routes - seek to relieve bumper-to-bumper rush-hour traffic, something Victorians once believed was only a mainland misfortune.  At worst.  Victoria used to have "rush minutes."  Now, during the height of the tourist season, more than 94,000 vehicles a day enter Victoria on these two highways. 

   Yet, despite its quickening pace.  Victoria continues to cultivate and expand its agreeable downtown ambience.  The result: international acclaim.  In its November issue, Conde Nast Traveler, in its second annual readers poll, announced that Victoria ranked first worldwide in the category of pleasant environment.  Overall it was judged the eighth best city - ahead of any other Canadian city and up there with the likes of Florence, Paris, and San Francisco.  Having the blessing of Conde Nast, a magazine based in New York and aimed at affluent travellers, one can expect more tourists coming from more distant places. 

   Meanwhile, the newest Victorians have come mainly from Alberta, Ontario and other parts of B.C.  Like the tourists, they're attracted by the mild, marine climate - Canada's kindest - the surrounding mountain and ocean views, and the easy access to Vancouver Island's rugged outdoors. 

   To outsiders, Victoria is well-known for its predictable, old-world charm.  Canada's city of gardens, high teas, and heritage.  It is promoted - relentlessly and successfully - as a "bit of England," which is, paradoxically, true and false. 

   A few of the heritage buildings are gone, replaced by new development, and some new ones are built to look old.  Yet, to retain that Victorian flavor, considerable money is being poured into the restoration of significant buildings. 

   Two hundred of B.C.'s heritage buildings are in the downtown core and many embellish residential areas.  These old buildings are reminiscent of the city's beginnings in 1843 as a Hudson's Bay Fort and as a gold-rush stopover in the 1850s and '90s.  It was then that much of Victoria's modern-day appearance began to take shape.  The city centre now is charmingly irregular with cobblestone squares and Europeanlike alleys, an easy, pleasant downtown to wander.  At the heart of the city is its harbor, where major development on its downtown side has been kept to a minimum. 

   Though development is most noticeable in the downtown core, it is happening all over the region.  In 1988, 8,642 building permits worth nearly $400 million were issued. 

   There is, the skeptics say, no real reason for the building boom, except to serve a flourishing tourist trade.  Others disagree and say the development is healthy and will prevent Victoria from remaining a sleepy backwater town. 

   Today, some buildings that speak eloquently of Victoria's past are being brought back to life.  The city's largest hotel, the Empress, has recently undergone a $45-million facelift.  The 82-year-old landmark has been restored to reflect its original opulence, yet it is also modernized.   An addition, styled after the original building, has been built to provide more rooms, a new registration area, a pool and recreation rooms.  Older rooms have new wiring, new plumbing and new decor that reflects the dignity of past eras. 

   Considerable sums were spent renovating the Crystal Ballroom, Bengal Lounge, and Palm Court.  In the Palm Court alone, $50,000 was invested into refurbishing a striking domed ceiling with ornate plaster shields and stained glass that had been covered and lost in the 1960s. 

   A few blocks from the Empress is the new Eaton Centre, a development that has divided many Victorians.  When it was proposed in 1986 by Cadillac Fairview, a Toronto firm, there had been no increase in downtown retail space for 10 years.  Instead of welcoming the company, normally quiet, uninvolved Victorians joined to fight the "boys from Toronto."  The ensuing protest was long and bitter. 

   Proponents said the massive new shopping complex would revitalize the downtown core.  Opponents said it would gut a block of the old town, wiping out 11 heritage buildings.  These included the Driard Hotel (c.1892), which was the premier hotel until the Empress took over in 1908.  It would also jeopardize those independent downtown merchants who had held the core together for so long.  Diverse groups of heritage lovers, merchants, and concerned citizens formed the Save Our City Coalition which collected more than 7,000 names on petitions. 

   Despite the opposition, Cadillac Fairview was permitted to build its $100-million, 150-store centre, and efforts taken to preserve the "old English" look of Victoria.  Through the sale of Broad Street, a downtown lane partially lost in the development, the city made $1.9 million to put into a downtown investment fund for preserving and upgrading the heritage buildings that were left. 

   The new Eaton Centre is built to look old, a four-storey, brick-faced structure with the salvaged facades of some demolished heritage buildings.  It even has imitation windows with venetian blinds painted on for effect. 

   Many heritage lovers were appalled.  It was, they cried, a compromise that had nothing to do with heritage. 

   "It's a sad, obscene mockery of what was there," in the opinion of Mark Madoff, Hallmark Society president and founding member of the Save Our City Coalition.  "We would have preferred a good, modern design over what we got.  We're sacrificing quality by putting up these pseudo-heritage type buildings.  They don't satisfy anyone." 

   It seems, however, shoppers, browsers, and sightseers don't agree: they're flocking around Eaton Centre, and there's no doubt that this structure has added presence to the city's heart. 

   With the first phase of the Eaton Centre open, the second phase is due for completion in August.  City planner Len Vopnfjord says it's the beginning of a trend for downtown, and many, he adds, share his satisfaction with the development. 

   Though people may be split on the Eaton Centre, the new Victoria Conference Centre has been well-received.  Erected behind the Empress Hotel at a cost of $22 million, the 1,500-seat complex takes advantage of the landmarks all around it: the Empress, the B.C. Legislative Buildings, the Crystal Gardens, Thunderbird Park. 

   "The conference centre either shows these things up as a backdrop or it incorporates elements of their design into its own design," says Robert Amos, a local artist well-known for his watercolor street scapes.  "So there is harmony and resonance from one building to another." 

   With its large, outdoor plaza, towering atrium, cupolas and domes, the conference is an example of a well-executed new design.  It has restored the confidence of many discriminating Victorians.  "Whoever heard of a major new building being erected lower than the surrounding buildings," exclaims Amos.  "It's a brilliant idea." 

   "It has given us a different vision of what we can look like," says Marilyn Callahan, director of the School of Social Work at the University of Victoria.  "In the past we've looked at new developments and found them wanting.  Now we see they can be high-quality and tasteful and fit into the downtown ambience." 

   That ambience, particularly on the waterfront, is changing quickly.  Across the harbor from the Empress, the Songhees Indian land, once an industrial eyesore, is turning into upscale condominiums and green space.  When finished, there will be 1,500 housing units, a major marina, floating restaurant, and 250-room hotel: total price - $75 million.  The development includes a waterfront walkway from the Songhees land to neighboring West Bay. 

   Development on the Songhees land and in West Bay is adding a new dimension to an area considered "on the wrong side of the (Johnson Street) bridge" for years.  However, a five-kilometre seaside promenade will soon join the two sides of the harbor. 

   Speculators now are looking to other parts of the harbor.  Two sites on Wharf Street, between the Songhees land and the Empress, are being eyed as areas for an open public market, a new maritime museum, and transportation facilities for passengers arriving by plane or boat. 

   Though development is being emphasized, heritage buildings are not being ignored, particularly on Government Street, which the Eaton Centre fronts.  One of the oldest streets in the city, Government was the centre of Victoria 100 years ago.  It has become a tourist mecca in recent years, with some shops staying open until 11 p.m. during summer.  Now, international retailers like Ralph Lauren clothiers are moving onto Government, giving the street an upscale feel. 

   Across from the Eaton Centre on Government, Munro's Books is in a 1909 Royal Bank of Canada building.  In 1984, after sitting idle for three years, the interior had become shabby.  Owner Jim Munro refurbished it in just eight weeks.  Today, original Corinthian-topped columns tower up the high ornate ceiling.  Stained glass and beautiful artwork shows above dark wooden bookshelves.  Munro is pleased to have the Eaton Centre as his new neighbor. 

   Lower Johnson, another key street in those early days, is also coming back to life.  During the Cariboo and Klondike gold rushes, Johnson was Victoria's front door since boats berthed at its foot.  Virtually everyone who arrived travelled up Johnson.  Over the years, Johnson Street declined into a skid row.  A few developments, however, are changing that. 

   In the mid-1970s, the Market Square project on Johnson was unveiled.  Rundown buildings and an old ravine were turned into three levels of shops, restaurants, and offices opening onto a plant-filled courtyard.  Today, Market Square is popular with residents and tourists alike, but for some years it sat like a fresh new island in the middle of decrepitude. 

   About four years ago, when developer Michael Williams turned his attention to lower Johnson, the area began picking up.  </I
    Triangle Island   
  Photography and text by Larry Pynn 
   A million seabirds count on it  

   Anchored amid the swirling mists and breakers off northwestern Vancouver Island is a place so small and seemingly inconsequential it remains virtually unknown.  But to more than one million seabirds, Triangle Island is British Columbia's greatest nesting colony.  In a province with 27,300 kilometres of rugged and largely unpopulated coastline, this remote island is the nesting place of one-fifth of B.C.'s breeding seabirds.  Its numbers nearly equal those of the Queen Charlotte Islands combined. 

   Located 45 kilometres northwest of Cape Scott, at the outermost of the Scott Islands group, 85-hectare Triangle Island is on the marine highway to nowhere.  The island served as a lighthouse station from 1910 to 1919.  However, that function was all but useless, even though the lighthouse was, at 210 metres, the highest one on the coast.  In 1912 a hurricane blew the well-secured tower over a cliff.  Soon rebuilt, it was doomed to close because heavy fogs frequently obscured its light.  Today only mice, voles, and rabbits permanently inhabit this forbidding island.  Human visitors, thankfully, are as infrequent as sunshine.  They are occasional fishermen seeking safe haven in Pacific storms, and researchers pondering the propagation of seabirds. 

   Each year, however, between April and September, a hail of birds arrives from the surrounding North Pacific.  They squawk and in a frenzy to select nesting sites, defend them from predators, and raise their chicks.  Species include Cassin's and rhinoceros auklets, tufted puffins, common murres, glaucous-winged gulls, pigeon guillemots, pelagic cormorants, black oyster catchers, bald eagles, and peregrine falcons. 

   About one million Cassin's auklets - more than 40 percent of their world population - are the first to arrive.  They burrow under the tufted hair grass and salmonberry bushes that carpet the green and brown landscape.  Like some 84,000 of their rhino cousins, the stubby Cassin's auklets commute each day from ocean feeding waters to hungry chicks waiting in burrows.  They return under the protection of darkness, their unmistakable silhouettes drawn in thick fluttering waves to the steep 210-metre-high hillsides. 

   "It's amazing," remarks Ken Summers, 42, of Aldergrove, who has conducted research at Triangle Island for four years.  "They come in at night and know exactly where to go.  When they leave in the morning, you just hear the wind whistling through their wings." 

   Cassin's auklets are the most prolific breeders among B.C.'s 15 seabird species, with as many as 400 separate burrows in a single 10-metre-square space on Triangle Island. 

   Some 52,000 tufted puffins, the largest colony on the Pacific coast south of Alaska, are active, even brazen, around their burrows during the day.  On congested breeding sites such as Puffin Rock, they circle, holding silvery sand lance crossways in their beaks, orange feet trailing awkwardly, and distinctive locks of pale yellow hair flowing. 

   Crowded together on exposed rocks and cliff ledges, an estimated 10,000 common murres stand penguinlike over their young.  They lean into the rock, shrieking madly, guarding against airborn predators like gulls, crows, eagles, and falcons.  Murres are well-adapted, perhaps too well, to cliff nesting.  Birds that fail to breed continue with their normal nesting behavior as though nothing had happened. 

   "They'll bring in fish and lay them down, or go through all the motions of nesting, even rolling the egg over, with nothing beneath them," says Summers.  Protected from hunters on the west coast, murres remain traditional game birds under Newfoundland's terms of Confederation in 1949, explains Steve Wetmore, B.C.'s chief of migratory birds for the Canadian Wildlife Service.  "They're shot by the boatload on the east coast.  They taste kind of oily, greasy, and fishy. Kind of yucky." 

   Elsewhere on Triangle Island, wide-eyed gull chicks huddle on the uppermost ledges, sizing up the lethal surf below, preparing for a first flight.  On nearby rocks, cormorants stand with waterlogged wings outstretched, as if in worship to the setting sun.  And, with Triangle Island being one of four breeding rookeries in B.C., up to 800 Steller's sea lions writhe about in harems, protecting their wrinkled pups with an incessant chorus of barks and belches. 

   That this treeless, windblown refuge has continued to thrive while some other key seabird sites in B.C. have declined is due as much to its geographic isolation as its prime breeding habitat and abundant marine life.  To date it has avoided the disruption facing nesting sites in the newly created South Moresby National Park Reserve, namely from introduced rats and raccoons, recreational boaters, and uneducated nature lovers. 

   Triangle Island also receives some provincial protection as the Anne Vallee Ecological Reserve, named after a University of British Columbia master's student from Quebec who fell to her death in 1982.  The province issues visitor permits only for scientific and educational purposes, although lack of enforcement staff and penalties makes conformance largely voluntary. 

   The ineffectiveness of current regulations protecting B.C. nesting sites was shown during an 875,000-litre spill of bunker C fuel oil in December, 1988, from the Nestucca barge off Grays Harbor, Wash.   Oil from the barge drifted northward into Canadian waters against the prediction of the U.S. Coast Guard, fouling Vancouver Island's west coast and closing commercial shellfish harvesting.  At least 12,500 seabirds - more than three-quarters of them common murres - were found dead in B.C. and Washington, although the actual kill may be closer to 50,000 birds. 

   Isolated, fist-sized blobs of oil floated with the prevailing currents as far as Triangle Island, more than 500 kilometres north of the spill site.  The experience made a mockery of a federal 10-kilometre exclusion zone around seabird colonies and other land sites in the event offshore oil drilling proceeds on the west coast.  A final decision on drilling awaits a five-year moratorium imposed by the B.C. government in March, 1989, shortly after the Nestucca spill. 

   Concerned about the spill's impact on Triangle Island, the Canadian Wildlife Service hired Summers and fellow researcher Michael Rodway, 38, of Ladner, to conduct a $72,000 census of the nesting seabirds last summer. 

   Dividing the island into sample plots, they scour its surface on hands and knees, checking for egg shells, feces, and feathers that mark an active burrow.  Sometimes they ferret out chicks to determine breeding success.  They also photograph rock cliffs from a five-metre-long inflatable craft, using a telephoto lens, counting the adult birds by putting the photos under a binocular microscope. 

   "This is the main site for murres right here," says Rodway, staggering to focus his lens and pointing to the waterfall of guano pouring off a crowded ledge.  As Summers works the outboard motor against the rising ocean swells, Rodway watches the young murres and adds: "At 20 days, they jump off the cliff.  The males lead them out, and the females, needing to build up their reserves, stay for a couple of extra days." 

   The luxury of studying such abundant wildlife has its own problems.  For example, getting the information without disrupting your subjects can be nerve-wracking.  The island is like a mine field.  A heavy foot can easily collapse shallow burrows, squishing the chick or exposing it to predators.  Researchers made amends by carrying around tiny wooden shingles for quick repairs.  Even approaching too close while photographing the cliffs can spook entire colonies of murres: they tend to exit en masse, like crowds after a concert, and leave their young undefended. 

   While the federal study shows total populations are healthy on Triangle Island, the virtual breeding failure of some 2,000 murres on nearby Castle Rock is possibly linked to the oil spill. 

   Despite the ever-present threat of oil spills and the undetermined impact of both high seas and inshore gill-net fishing, the seabirds' future on Triangle Island looks stable, provided humans keep away .

   Bird research on the island is still in its infancy.  Experience at other irreplaceable wildlife sites, most notably the killer whales rubbing beaches at Robson Bight on northern Vancouver Island, show even small-scale public viewing has a negative impact. 

   In the meantime, the public must be content with seabirds serving a more practical purpose - providing an early-warning system to environmental problems that could affect man. 

   "Often they are the first indication of something going wrong with the food chain," notes Steve Wetmore, holding a gull chick which will probably spend the winter at a garbage dump rather than at the remote landscape where it was born.  </I

    Osoyoos  
  Photography by Karl Spreitz

   The town of Osoyoos bears a revolutionary message for all British Columbia communities, especially those which are always trying to attract a big-industry panacea, like a pulp mill.  The message comes in a promotional videotape the Okanagan Valley town has produced after it had learned its own hard historical lessons. 

   The tape opens with a re-creation of gold rushers coming into the area during the last century, all looking for that elusive pot of gold in creek beds.  They don't find it.  Then they wake up to the realization that the real gold is all around them.  It's the environment.  It's the beauty of the land.  It's the fresh air.  It's the fresh water.  It's the warm climate.  They stay and become settlers. 

   Recent generations in Osoyoos have had to relearn this lesson.  They had fallen prey to the same illusion, but in other form.  We must, they had said to themselves, attract the pot of gold to us.  We must seek industrial development.  Meanwhile, they began to worry about their environment.  They feared raw effluent would begin to make its way into Lake Osoyoos, a gem of a lake - warm, beautiful, filled with fish. 

   Town administrator Lockie Miles chuckles philosophically over what Osoyoos used to do, vainly, to attract industry.  "Like many other B.C. communities, for instance, we got a grant in 1981 under the B.C. Development Plan to build an industrial park.  Initially we had about 10 hot prospects.  Today the park sits fairly empty.  And we paved it, electrified it, and put in sewage lines, and all the services." 

   The seeds of Osoyoos's latter-day awakening go back to 1964.  By a 10-vote margin, residents opted for sewage lagoons on the West Bench, a move that prevented the possibility of septic fields ever polluting Lake Osoyoos.  Then, in 1980, town council had a stroke of genius that made Osoyoos a leader to be imitated.  It put the treated effluent to work.  The purified water, "almost drinkable", now sprinkles a soccer field, the desert Park Racetrack, and the 18-hole Osoyoos Golf and Country Club. 

   "We are now a concerned environmental community," says Miles.  "We like to think we are the most environmentally concerned community in B.C."  He even gets the impression that the attitude of Osoyoos has changed so much that if a pulp mill wanted to locate here the town would say no. 

   This evolution in thinking is paying off, and in unexpected ways.  Tourism has been a mainstay, with some fluctuations, since the mid-1940s, but this past year was sensational.  Over and above this, Osoyoos has recently become a retirement centre.  One-third of the town's citizens are retired, many of them only in their 50s.  As word spreads, it's likely more will select Osoyoos as the place to buy their last home. 

  Osoyoos's setting is indeed idyllic, and it boasts some unusual features.  Even its name is intriguing.  It derives from the Okanagan Indian word Sooyoos, meaning "the narrows" or "the place where two lakes come together."  No one is sure how the name changed by the time Osoyoos become a Hudson's Bay trading post in 1860, but some say that Peter O'Reilly, a magistrate from Hope, jokingly suggested that adding an O would dignify it.

   Downtown Osoyoos sits at the junction of two major roads.  Highway 97 runs north up the Okanagan Valley to Penticton, Kelowna and Vernon, and south across the B.C. - Washington border, Highway 3, the Crowsnest, runs west to Hope, and east over a bridge across the lake toward the Rockies.  It's here, at this bridge, where Osoyoos Lake narrows to become almost two lakes. 

   You can best appreciate the overall landscape by driving up the corkscrewing turns of Highway 3 to the summit of Anarchist Mountain, 1,499 metres.  Osoyoos Lake appears as an oasis amidst the driest land in Canada.  Its shimmering blue waters stretch along the southern end of B.C.'s Okanagan Valley, where the Monashee Mountains roll down from the east and meld with the Thompson Plateau.  Lush green fruit trees embellish the shores, a stark contrast to the parched brown hills on the upper slopes, out of reach of irrigation lines that nourish the lakeside orchards. 

   In the distant south, beyond the international boundary that bisects this 15-kilometre-long lake, the tiny town of Oroville, Washington, sits at the outlet of the lake.  Directly below Anarchist Mountain, the homes and shops of Osoyoos, population 2,956, cluster around the lake.  </I

   CANADIANS GO HOME  

    At a UN conference in Turkey, Ottawa's strident homofeminist agenda provokes an angry counter-attack from the Third World   

   When Canada's delegates to the Second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements arrived at their quarters in the posh Istanbul Hyatt three weeks ago, they knew what their mission was: to manipulate yet another UN conference into endorsing far-left social policies that could never be sold openly to their own citizens.  In particular, even though the Habitat II conference was ostensibly about housing issues, the Canadians intended to ensure that feminist goals such as contraception, abortion on demand and school-based sex assistance clinics were enshrined in the conference's final document.  They also planned to battle strenuously for an "inclusive" definition of family that sanctions homosexual unions. 

   Opposing Canada and its allies in the U.S. and European Union delegations were dozens of developing countries which are becoming increasingly enraged over the unrelenting Western campaign to impose degenerate policies on their impoverished and unsuspecting people.  Also opposed was the Vatican delegation and a small but dedicated collection of pro-family and pro-life non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 

   Still, the Canadians had every reason to feel confident.  After all, they had led the successful charge to feminize the final conference documents at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo and last year's Fourth UN Conference on Women in Beijing.  Furthermore, the unprecedented input being granted in Istanbul to feminist NGOs - many of which are directly funded by Western governments - gave Canada's veteran negotiators yet another reason to anticipate easy victory. 

   But things didn't go as planned.  While Habitat II's final document predictably contained a host of references to "environmental sustainability" and other liberal buzz-words, Third World resistance forced the deletion of all significant references to "re-productive health" (abortion) and "sexual health" (mandatory sex instruction). 

   Even more embarrassing, a bid by developing countries to stress the crucial social role of the natural mother-and-father family forced Canadian delegates to reveal their own anti-family program.  This, in turn, earned Canada an unprecedented public condemnation from the Vatican's chief spokesman.  And even a key U.S. delegate felt compelled to complain that Canada's militancy was preventing proper international recognition of parental responsibility. 

   These contentious Canadian manoeuvres abroad are not merely intended to force Western liberalism on "backward" Third Worlders.  The manipulation of the UN process, family advocates warn, is a key component of the Chretien government's strategy to impose social radicalism back at home. 

   The Canadian delegation wasted little time before showing its hand in Istanbul.  After conference-opening formalities were dispensed with on Monday, June 3, delegates got down to deliberations.  Following standard UN conference procedure, a draft document had been prepared at a series of pre-conference meetings known as PrepComs.  Phrases that delegates could not agree on at the final PrepCom had been placed in brackets.  Those phrases would now either be deleted or their brackets removed. 

   Shortly after deliberations began in Committee One, which was charged with resolving most of the contentious passages, nation after nation spoke in favour of removing the brackets around a phrase acknowledging parental responsibilities for children.  But just when it appeared this seemingly innocuous affirmation would be approved, Canada and the European Union objected.  U.S. support for the phrase thereupon wavered, forcing the paragraph in question to be set aside. 

   The Western objections to "parental responsibility" centred around the phrase's alleged failure to conform with the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.  That document - which the Alberta government (alone in Canada) has refused to ratify - sets out a number of children's "rights" which exist independently of parents. 

   But when word of the American refusal to endorse parental responsibility seeped back to the U.S., outrage was immediate.  Why, Congressional conservatives demanded, was their country denigrating parents? 

   By Friday, June 7, that anger had borne fruit.  U.S. delegate Mike Stegman told a lobbyist that the American delegation now wanted to endorse parental responsibility, but was being stymied by Canada.  Not until the following week, with Canadian delegates this time maintaining a studious silence, was the phrase finally able to make its way into the document. 

   That muteness by no means signalled a Canadian change of heart, however.  Another paragraph contained a bracketed reference stressing the vital role of the family in human settlements.  Throughout days of heated debate, Canada consistently opposed liberating the phrase from its brackets.  "Family" must be replaced by more "inclusive" language, Canada insisted, to acknowledge "a variety of forms" of families. 

   Since Canada never offered to define which "families" it wished to recognize, delegations from predominantly Catholic and Muslim countries concluded that one objective was to obtain tacit recognition of homosexual partnerships.  They also suspected Canada was deliberately undermining recognition of the foundational role of the two-parent heterosexual marriage. 

   On Thursday, June 13, the deadlocked paragraph was referred to a closed-door "working group" convened to resolve such impasses.  According to three delegates who participated in the private negotiations, the Canadian delegate complained that the family was already over-represented.  "Family" would be referred to three times in the final document, the Canadian huffed, whereas other important terms like "gender" enjoyed only a single mention.  Eventually, the "family" phrase had to be deleted, even though none of the other 168 countries represented in Istanbul had objected. 

   This Canadian insistence on disparaging the traditional family mystified developing-world representatives.  Marthe Lorena de Casco, a Honduran journalist who served on the Vatican delegation, recounted a conversation she had with a female Canadian delegate.  "Your ancestors made Canada what it is with beautiful families that overcame the harsh conditions they faced," Mrs. de Casco told the woman.  "Without the family, you would not have what you have today. Why do you want developing countries not to have good families?"  The Canadian delegate offered no reply, Mrs. de Casco reported. 

   Dr. Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the chief spokesman for Pope John Paul II and the Vatican delegation's press liaison in Istanbul, castigated the Canadian stance at his June 14 conference-closing press conference.  By its consistent opposition to the use of the word family, and its attempt to compare the number of times "family" and "gender" occurred in the document, Canada was in effect arguing that "the family is a concept prejudicial to women," Dr. Navarro-Valls charged. 

   Not only was this anti-family position a contravention of the UN's 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Dr. Navarro-Valls added, it was a prime example of how Western liberals had poisoned the entire Istanbul gathering.  "It is a pity these kinds of discussions, which have nothing to do with Habitat, will compromise the unanimity of the final document." 

   By then, in fact, the revolt of the developing world against the West's homo-feminist agenda had tied up debate for days.  In the conference's first week, the U.S. - firmly backed by Canada - had introduced language recognizing "reproductive health" and "sexual health" services into four additional sites in the Habitat II document. 

   Since Western delegates had deliberately failed to specify what the language really referred to, conservative NGOs quickly tipped the developing world as to what was at stake.  As defined by the World Health Organization, "reproductive health" means providing individuals with access to "means of fertility regulation of their choice."  "Fertility regulation," in turn, includes "interrupting unwanted pregnancies," a euphemism for abortion.  "Sexual health" services, meanwhile, was code for school-based sex instruction. 

   The Western goal was to extract a UN endorsement that could be used to club national and local governments to accept contraception, abortion, and sex-ed services.  But the feminist scenario did not play out as scripted.  Once the real meaning of the phrases was explained, predominantly Catholic and Muslim nations dug in their heels.  Such programs are anathema to their fundamental beliefs, they protested.  Furthermore, Istanbul was supposed to be about human settlements, they noted, not advancing the pro-abortion and anti-family agendas that dominated Cairo and Beijing. 

   Faced with such Third World obstinacy, the Western negotiating juggernaut mobilized all of its resources.  The "Women's Caucus," a collection of feminist NGOs led by former U.S. congressman Bella Abzug's Women's Economic and Development Organization (WEDO), had already been granted unprecedented freedom to lobby delegates.  The feminist NGOs redoubled those efforts while simultaneously making a naked bid to hijack the official NGO document by assuring themselves a preponderance on the roster of of 20 NGO spokesmen slated to address Committee Two delegates dealing with Habitat II's implementation. 

   Both feminist powerplays were thwarted.  Toronto lawyer Gwen Landolt, who chaired the pro-family and pro-life Caucus for Stable Communities, had astutely secured a slot on the NGO's International Facilitating Group after arriving in Istanbul.  When the feminist NGOs tried to import their agenda into the NGO document on June 9, Mrs. Landolt calmly deleted every reference to "re-productive health" and "sexual orientation." 

   And when the feminist NGOs appeared before Committee Two to deliver their pitch the next day, another unpleasant surprise lay in store for them.  After Ms. Abzug and three Women's Caucus partisans delivered the opening NGO addresses, the Vatican successfully petitioned for opposing NGO viewpoints be heard.  Delegates thereupon listened raptly as a battery of conservative NGOs detailed how the entire NGO process had been improperly kidnapped by the feminist caucus with the blessing of UN officials and Western delegates. 

   Mrs. Landolt took the opportunity to point out that many of the supposedly "grass-roots" feminist NGOs were really unrepresentative "phantom" agencies sustained by government funding.  As an example of such handouts, she cited the Canadian government's $40,000 grant to WEDO. 

   Since the previous Thursday, the homo-feminist camp had been waging a campaign of "exhaust and conquer."  Once again, Canada led the way, introducing dozens of amendments to the draft document in an obvious ploy to tire Third World delegates into submission.  Committee One chairman Shafqat Kakakhel declined to condemn openly the Canadian manoeuvre as a stalling tactic, but conceded that it was "undeniable" that "it burdens other delegations with other material." 

   Mercedes Wilson, chief Guatemalan delegate, was less diplomatic.  "What Canada has done is shameful," she commented.  "They are so arrogant.  It would be comical if it wasn't so destructive." 

   Once the Western nations had created an appropriately massive backlog of unresolved paragraphs, they referred as much of the contentious language as possible to the smaller closed-door working groups.  Canada, the U.S. and the EU, who generally controlled the chairmen of these subgroups, tried to obscure the location of the working groups, and restrict provision of translation services.  When this procedural manipulation failed, threats began to suspend crucial aid projector to increase interest rates on development loans. 

   Mrs. Landolt spoke with a Tanzanian delegate who confessed sadly that she was unable to speak out against Western initiatives she opposed.  "If I don't conform, my people will suffer," the delegate said. 

   Abdulaziz Al Khedeiri, one of Saudi Arabia's chief delegates, said that the Western bloc also used a threat to relocate the offices of the UN Commission on Human Settlements from Nairobi as a lever against African delegates.  Mr. Khedeiri added that further pressure was exerted through hints that the developed nations' willingness to ratify the conference goal of devoting 0.7% of gross national product to supporting human settlements was contingent upon adopting the West's social platform. 

   British Secretary of State for the Environment John Gummer, the head of the British delegation, was the sole Western leader to condemn this bullying publicly.  In a private interview, Mr. Gummer denounced "the imperialistic view of poor people who live a long way away." 

   But unlike in Beijing and Cairo, the West's bullying and obfuscation proved largely unavailing.  Led by Saudi Arabia, which was immune to western economic threats, developing nations forced the deletion of one "re-productive health" reference after another.  At 7 a.m. on Friday, after developing-world representatives had rebuffed a last-ditch Western ploy to sneak its abortion and sex-education agenda past exhausted delegates under the guise of a "health" definition lifted from the Beijing document, U.S. delegate Melinda Kimble stalked from the Committee One meeting room shaking with rage. 

   When the dust settled, one "reproductive health" reference had survived, as did language endorsing "family planning".  But at Saudi insistence, the unimpeded right of countries to interpret all aspects of the Habitat document in the context of their individual cultural, religious and ethical values was explicitly confirmed. 

   As the conference wound down, criticism of the efforts of Canada and other Western nations was widespread.  </I
   The Saute-Mouton slips beneath Route 112's Victoria Bridge, the longest in the world at the time of its completion in 1859 and the first to span the St. Lawrence.  The boat then eases past the Cubist modules of Moishe Safdie's Habitat apartment complex, stacked on the riverbank to the left like a child's building blocks.  Habitat was built as an "experiment in urban living" for Expo 67, Montreal's vastly successful world's fair.  The skeletal frame of Buckminster Fuller's geodesic dome, another vestige of the fair, peeks above the foliage of Ile Ste-Helene, one of a dozen islets strewn like stepping stones along the length of the city.  Finally, the passengers are deposited back at Quai Victoria. 

   On first impression, Montreal seems foreign to the North American continent, a European city somehow run aground on alien shores.  In the past decade or so, this aesthetic aspect (combined with an exceptionally favorable exchange rate) has made the metropolis a bustling backlot for American filmmakers looking for the streets of Rome or Paris only six hours from Hollywood.  For any European visitor, strolling through Place Jacques-Cartier or Square Dorchester is an oddly familiar experience.  Surely, the City Hall is a copy of the Hotel de Ville in Paris, and the Mary Queen of the World Basilica a miniature of St. Peter's in Rome? 

   Yet to North Americans, there's no mistaking Montreal for any other city on the continent: raffish, risque, carefree, a wide-open town, nightclubs packed till all hours.  Certifiably French, foreign.  An exotic place, romantic, sensual, its past filled with adventure and colorful characters. 

   Montreal is a city of diversity and complexity, with a non-French ethnic population that is a mixture of English and a hundred other minorities.  Greeks, Italians, Portuguese, and Jews each have a community 100,000-strong.  There are Asians and Haitians too.  Montreal is also cosmopolitan, fashionable, intellectual, a political hotbed, a university town, bohemian, a mecca for artists and nonconformists who gather here to slip the stifling bonds of provincialism.  And it is a cultured city that supports fine-arts museums, two symphonies, ballet companies, an opera company, and French and English theater.  Not to mention the Festivale de Theatre des Ameriques biennial, which takes over the city every odd year and has established an international reputation for presenting superior avant-garde and over-the-edge theater. 

   As in France, dining out in Montreal tends to be a ritual: The best meals are evening-long affairs with a late start, uncounted courses, unrestrained conversation, uninhibited conviviality.  The city's cafe society, perhaps the largest on the continent, thrives on Bishop, Crescent, Laurier, St-Denis, St-Laurent (the Main), St-Paul, and half a dozen other lively thoroughfares.  In summer, these cafes en plein air - more than 400 at last count - may be the quintessential Montreal social forum.  Striped awnings are unrolled; bright umbrellas bloom above sidewalk tables.  A jug of sangria, a carafe of wine, a mug of beer, and spirited companions combine with a comfortable setting for watching the world go by and savoring the precious days and evenings of the few warm months.  Montreal is indeed theatrical, extroverted, and gregarious. 

   This vivacious city is on a roll.  Peaceful cooperation between the French and les autres once again predominates, except for the die-hard factions on either side.  The Parti Quebecois of the late Rene Levesque was a painful but necessary instrument for asserting the primacy of French language and culture in the province of its North American birth.  The last decade has seen the ascendancy of a well-educated, bilingual Quebecois business class that has displaced priests, politicians, lawyers, and bureaucrats as the province's elite. 

   This new generation of Quebecois has shattered long-time Anglophone domination of the province, even elbowing into le haute monde.  A society-page roster of a recent Hunt Club soiree at the Ritz (what could be more Anglo?) reads like a Who's Who of Francophone high society, with a sprinkling of WASPs for old time's sake.  Culturally and economically, the Quebecois are confidently maitres chez nous. 

   For the most part, the province and the city have turned from cultural affairs to economic ones.  The FOR SALE/ A VENDRE signs that sprouted like mushrooms on front lawns in predominantly English-speaking neighborhoods during the threatening days of separatism have been replaced with the signs of a vigorous economy flexing its muscles after a decade of political confinement - soaring property values, gentrification of run-down neighborhoods, new Metro (subway) lines, new museums, a downtown construction boom.  Montreal, en forme encore. 

   The Montreal street grid is actually oriented on a northeast-southwest axis, but no one in the city follows that.  The convention is that rue Sherbrooke runs east-west, and boulevard St-Laurent (The Main) runs north-south.  So, for example, Universite de McGill is west of St-Laurent, and Vieux-Montreal and the river are at the southern end of town. 

   Vieux-Montreal (Old Montreal)  

   From Quai Victoria, the patinated spires and gleaming domes in Vieux-Montreal present an essentially antique picture; the eye willingly overlooks the dissonant details of modernity.  At the district's eastern extremity a copper statue of the Virgin Mary stands behind the tiny Notre-Dame-de-Bonsecours chapel .  Known also as the sailors' chapel, its roofline is cluttered with steeple and tower.  This is the 1773 Our Lady of the Harbour, celebrated in the song "Suzanne" by Montrealer Leonard Cohen.  Beside the church shines the silver dome of Bonsecours Market, Canada's Parliament from 1849 to 1852 and, for decades following, Montreal's principal market (it now houses municipal offices).  On a slight elevation behind Bonsecours' classical facade rises the Second Empire roof of City Hall, where, on a third-floor balcony in 1967, Charles de Gaulle fanned the flames of separatism with his disruptive exhortation, "Vive le Quebec libre!"  Farther west, sunlight gleams off the white cupola of the former Palais de Justice.  Still farther west, twin Gothic spires nicknamed Temperance and Perseverance soar above the nave of Notre-Dame Basilica, cynosure of the Roman-Catholic faithful since 1829. 

   Behind these archaisms, the more familiar North American cityscape to the north and northwest reaffirms itself in concrete apartment buildings and office high-rises, undistinguished except for the anodized elegance of the Bourse de Montreal (Stock Exchange Tower) and the cruciform mass of Place Ville-Marie.  Then the eye looks deeper into the scene and alights on another of Montreal's unique views: Behind the downtown spires, Mont Royal lifts a leafy crown bejeweled with a metal cross, the thematic antecedent of Place Ville-Marie. 

   But this view is fast-changing: Both the expanded Palais des Congres de Montreal convention center and the World Trade Centre office-retail and hotel complex will open in 1991.  The latter will occupy several city blocks in Vieux-Montreal, including rue St-Jacques, formerly the "Wall Street" of Canada.  By then, the area will be home to two other megascale commercial projects: A $250-million, 51-story office tower project with a winter garden and year-round outdoor skating rink a la New York's Rockefeller Center will be nestled between Place Bonaventure and Place du Canada.  Rivalling it will be the 45-story IBM-Marathon building, facing the Sheraton Centre, that will feature an adjoining eight-story winter garden. 

   The waterfront area has also undergone critical development in the past six years, critical because the harborside and rue de la Commune form the southern boundary of Vieux-Montreal - cradle of the city, its greatest tourist attraction, and, second only to Quebec City's Place Royale, a repository of the nation's past.  The 95-acre historic district extends west to rue McGill, east to rue Berri, and north to rue St-Antoine - roughly corresponding to the perimeter of the old walls of the city. 

   More changes are in store, planned to coincide with the city's 350th-anniversary celebration in 1992.  The Montreal Archeology and History Centre, opening near Place Royale at the precise site of the first European settlement in Montreal, is part of a scheme that will restore Montreal's waterfront to its former glory. 

   Most of the architecture here is Victorian, although there remain enough crooked alleys and cockeyed houses from earlier eras to proclaim the district's 350 years of habitation.  The old quarter is enclosed and intimate, the scale human.  Around every corner a new scene presents itself - a confusion of ancient masonry and fire escapes, a carriageway leading to an enclosed courtyard, a curving row of century-old gray-stone buildings (no two of them alike), a blue sliver of the St. Lawrence glimpsed between dwellings. 

   Since the area's revival in the 1960s, scores of field-stone dwellings and warehouses along the narrow streets have been scrubbed down and renovated; they are now occupied by shops, restaurants, clubs, businesses, studios, museums, and private homes.  The venerable quartier has become a vibrant place in which to live, work, eat, and play. 

   There's little danger that Vieux-Montreal will turn into a touristy museum piece like New York City's South Street Seaport or Boston's Faneuil Hall-Quincy Market.  Even when it was down at the heels, this was still a working neighborhood, with banks along rue St-Jacques, law offices and courthouses on rue Notre-Dame, and, along lesser thoroughfares, import-export companies, shipping firms, photography studios, book publishers, printers, nightclubs, restaurants, even a costume emporium. 
 

   After its revival, Vieux-Montreal was still cut off from the river - its lifeline since the 17th century - by fenced dockyards, railroad tracks, and a phalanx of five grain elevators that seemed to crush the old city with their mass.  Then, in the late 1970s, the bulk of the dockyard operations shifted several miles east.  Down came the fences and the elevators.  What remained were the railroad tracks, several hangars, and four empty piers as broad as aircraft-carrier decks: Alexandra, King Edward, Jacques-Cartier, and Victoria.  The river had been "returned" to the city, and a great debate began: What to do with this wonderful new resource? 

   Fortunately, the city spurned the usual pressure to construct a megaproject and instead chose a modest, step-by-step plan.  Two phases have thus far produced grassy, landscaped expanses, ponds, and flower-filled planters on both sides of the tracks; grade crossings for pedestrians; cycling paths; and renovation of the 1922 Sailor's Memorial Tower at the tip of Victoria Pier. 

   People drift down from Place Jacques-Cartier, the heart of Vieux-Montreal, to stroll around the piers or rent bicycles and quadricycles.  Clowns, jugglers, musicians, balloon sculptors, and food vendors add to the festive air as a once moribund part of town comes alive with activity.  Concerts take place on summer nights beneath a big-top tent on Quai Jacques-Cartier; later in the evening, the musical torch is passed to Quebecois   chanteurs performing on a beer-garden boat docked at the end of the pier. 

   A flea market occupies part of former Hangar No. 8, while the hangar's upper level is devoted to one of the Vieux-Port's two major annual summer exhibitions, Images du Futur.  This international showcase highlights the latest technological advances in the visual arts: laser and video displays, computer graphics, holography, sound-and-light-wave sculptures, computer-synthesized sound-scapes, and multi-sensory, multi-media installations.  Each year the exhibition presents a different country's artists, cultural organizations, and corporations.  Next door in Hangar No. 9 is Expotec, an equally popular annual exhibition presenting interactive displays about the latest scientific research and technological developments of interest to the general public.  Attracting some 300,000 people, the 1990 exhibition was about sports of every kind.  Also here is the 7-story-high, 70-foot-wide IMAX Super Cinema screen, which presents films year-round. 

   Those who would like to see Canada at work can tour the Great Lakes freighter Maplecliffe Hall, which carries grain from Thunder Bay to a deep-sea transfer terminal at Baie-Comeau on the north shore of the Gulf of St. Lawrence; from late June to early September, business is slow, so the owners dock the Maplecliffe at the Vieux-Port and welcome visitors on board. 

   Until the 1960s, Place Jacques-Cartier, a cobbled rectangle sloping down from the ornate City Hall to rue de la Commune, was the city's busiest open-air market (the only reminders of this function are flower stands on a narrow median).  Today the plaza justifiably remains the focal point of Vieux-Montreal.  Place Jacques-Cartier can be magical, especially on a warm summer night, with the splashing Vauquelin fountain, the shadowy columns on the City Hall's floodlit facade, the sidewalk vendors and street musicians, the caleches drawn by stoic nags snuffling battered oat bags.  </I
   METRAC: A Catalyst for Change  

   METRAC (The Metro Action Committee on Public Violence Against Women and Children) was established in 1984 by the council of Metropolitan Toronto.  It succeeds a task force initiated by the council in 1982 to address the concerns of women in Toronto after a series of rape-murders in the city. 

   The task force involved 80 volunteer members from a wide range of backgrounds: doctors, lawyers, politicians, police, social workers, urban planners, workers from rape crisis centres, and other women's organizations.  They established a comprehensive, multidisciplinary approach which METRAC has carried forward in its work on violence prevention. 

   The recommendations of the task force were both extensive and far-sighted.  METRAC's function, therefore, is to act as a catalyst for the implementation of these recommendations addressing criminal justice, policing, support services, public education and urban planning. 

   Since its inception, METRAC has been able to rely on the support of municipal politicians for its advocacy work.  In fact, METRAC carries out extensive consulting work with all three levels of government, as well as with community groups and the media to develop pioneering initiatives, programs, policies and practices to enhance the safety of women and children in Metro Toronto. 

   Context  

   Women's safety is affected by a multitude of factors.  These include: public understanding of sexual assault; urban design; treatment of offenders by the criminal justice system; the impact of pornography; and standards of professional conduct.  In Canada, the sexual victimization of women and children is pervasive; often it is only nominally discouraged.  It is crucial that we admit this and acknowledge that women's fears are based in reality.  As we women go about our daily lives in the city, we know when we feel unsafe, and why.  METRAC stresses the importance of consulting with women as a primary step in any project undertaken to make the city a safer place. 

   As an organization, METRAC is informed by women's experience, guided by a carefully developed analysis, committed to the eradication of violence and energized by recognition of the need for change. 

   Working in the areas of prevention and education, METRAC has recommended and launched many initiatives.  With the long-term goal of 24-hour safe access to the city, METRAC has placed women's safety and security issues firmly on the public agenda. 

   A Blueprint for Municipal Action  

   Much of the work done by METRAC has an important crime-prevention component.  Since assault by a stranger is, to some extent, a crime of opportunity, various physical/geographical features may enhance or detract from the use of a particular site for assault.  A number of METRAC's pilot projects, therefore, concentrate on urban design.  They include the following: 

    1. The WISE report   

  This was a groundbreaking project designed to document women's concerns about urban planning and design.  With support from Women Plan Toronto and the Faculty of Environmental Studies, York University, METRAC interviewed many women (including single mothers, older, immigrant and disabled women).  Their safety and security concerns form the basis of Women in Safe Environments ("the WISE report").

    2. Lighting in underground garages   

   METRAC successfully encouraged the establishment of a City of Toronto committee to review the standards of illumination and security in underground garages in Toronto.  Over two years, the committee's work has resulted in an amended by-law and higher illumination levels, improved signage, the whitewashing of all walls and the installation of new door-locking devices. 

    3. Safety audit of the transit system   

   Together with the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) and the Metro Toronto Police Force, METRAC initiated a safety audit of the 65 stations in the subway system.  This involved assessment of the safety, accessibility and distance from help of parts of the station buildings and grounds and was aimed at sexual assault prevention.  The 63 recommendations of the report have been adopted by the TTC, and audits of surface routes in the transit system have begun. 

    4. Safety audit of High Park   

   METRAC conducted safety audits of Toronto's largest park and made extensive recommendations designed to improve its safety for the women and children who use it. 

    5. Development of Safety Audit Kit  

   Recognizing that women limit their use of public and semipublic spaces when they feel unsafe, METRAC has developed a safety audit kit which women can use to analyse and document their safety concerns in the city, in their home neighbourhood or in their workplace. 

    6. Police training   

   Working with the Metro Toronto Police Force, METRAC has developed training programmes for sexual assault investigators and other police personnel to increase police sensitivity to sexual assault survivors.  The improved quality of investigations and consequent increase in reporting rate for sexual assault cases will have significant results for crime prevention. 

    7. The "Safe City" project   

   With impetus and information from METRAC, City of Toronto politicians produced an urban safety report, Safe City: Municipal Strategies to Prevent Violence Against Women and Children.  With the aid of the Safe City Committee, recommendations from the report are currently being implemented .

    8. Design guidelines   

   METRAC is currently preparing a discussion paper on women's safety and urban standards in order to facilitate the development of criteria for guidelines and standards for all buildings in the city: construction and renovation projects; shopping centres and housing projects; parks; and all other public and semipublic spaces. 

    9. In the schools   

   With schoolboards and educators, METRAC is working on both curriculum development and staff training in the area of violence prevention, together with the institution of supportive policies. 

    10. Community work   

   METRAC initiated a series of community-based conferences called Stopping Rape to raise awareness and prompt action at a community level.  METRAC has also supported greater access to Wen-Do self-defence programmes in schools, recreation centres and community buildings, noting especially that these need to be accessible for disabled women. 

   Conclusion  

   It is METRAC's experience that when city officials and urban planners and designers think about safety, their thoughts turn to fire and traffic regulations.  There is a tendency to overlook the necessity to create an environment which can be safely used and which, by deliberate planning and assessment, reduces the likelihood of attack and assault. 

   Those who are in any way vulnerable - children, women, disabled or elderly people - still have the right to safe access to the city they live in.  The explicit addressing of women's concerns about safety and sexual assault prevention results in urban design which enhances everyone's safety. 

   METRAC (The Metro Action Committee on Public Violence Against Women and Children) is located at 158 Spadina Road, Toronto M5R 2T8. 
Telephone: (416)-392-3135. TDD.  

   For METRAC's pieces in this feature, we are indebted to Ali M. Grant, Kate Sutherland, Becky Kane, Lyn Artmount, C.M. Donald, and Pat Freeman Marshall.  

    WOMEN TAKING SPACE   

   Many women never go out alone after dark.  Many try to arrange for friends to meet them at the bus stop, or spend scarce dollars on taking a cab.  Many women who work shifts in low-paying jobs cannot make either of these arrangements.  When we do go out, we avoid places that we judge to be unsafe.  Women simply do not have the freedom of movement in the city that most men enjoy without question: our use of public space is deeply affected by the pervasive threat of sexual assault. 

   Between a third and half of these sexual assaults take place in urban public space.  Unfortunately, the image of sexual assault by a stranger in a public place has all too often been that of a deranged man lurking in the bushes.  Similarly, the assault has often been blamed on the woman who is its victim: she was in the wrong place, at the wrong time, in the wrong clothes, acting in the wrong ways.  Endless work of feminist organizations over the decades has begun to debunk this mythology, although sadly there is still a lot of work to do. 

   Changing the environment to fit our needs can be one step in the fight against violence against women.  When it comes to women's safety, women have the knowledge and expertise that the "professionals" lack.  It does not require a degree in planning or design to recognise what makes a place unsafe and threatening.  It requires relevant experience, and women have a lifetime's worth of that.  </I

    The City for Women: No Safe Place  
  by Linda MacLeod  

    One in four women in Canada can expect to be sexually assaulted at some point in their lives, one half of these women before the age of 17. 

   One million women in Canada are abused by their husbands or live-in lovers each year. 

   15% of all homicides are murders of women by their husbands, but only 6% of all homicides are murders of men by their wives. 

   About 100,000 women in Canada are assaulted by someone other than their husbands or ex-husbands each year.   

   Violence is Part of Many Women's Lives  

   Women live in realistic fear of this high risk of violence.  56% of urban Canadian women feel unsafe walking alone in their own neighbourhoods after dark, while only 18% of men said they feel unsafe in the same circumstances.  Women's fear is escalated not only by their high risk of violence, but because the nature of women's victimization gives women the strong message that there is no safe place for them and no one they can trust. 

   Inequality Increases Fear  

   Women's fears are further escalated by daily experiences, responsibilities and perceptions which are tied to negative social values surrounding women's bodies and sexuality, to women's unequal economic and social status in our society and to their primary responsibility for the care of children.  Women's common experiences with sexual harassment as well as demeaning portrayals of women and their sexuality in the media and in billboard advertising, contribute to women's feelings of being at risk .

   Violence Has More Serious Consequences for Women  

   Women who are victims of violence suffer higher risks of serious injuries and trauma than men who are victims of violence.  Women who are victims of violence are more likely to suffer economic hardship than men who are victims of violence.  Women who are abused by their husbands may be forced to flee their homes, possessions and economic security to escape the violence.  Because women are more likely to be poor than are men, they are also less able to afford needed repairs, medical procedures and/or counselling necessitated by their victimization. 

   When women who are victims of violence seek help from legal, health and social services, they frequently find the services insensitive to their particular form of victimization or their experiences as women.  Many women report an experience of "double victimization" at the hands of helping agencies.  Immigrant, visible minority and disabled women also report that available services are often unknown to them and, even where they are known, are inaccessible because of language barriers, physical barriers, discrimination and/or the lack of specialized services to meet their particular needs. 

   How Does Your City Lose?  

   Fear exaggerates the inequality between rich and poor because the rich can afford sophisticated security systems and protection, leaving the poor even more vulnerable to crime, relatively speaking.  Withdrawal leaves the streets open to criminal behaviour, and contributes eventually to deteriorating business conditions.  The quality of life of the entire community is eroded, city life becomes devalued, degraded, and the collapse of the community eventually becomes inevitable. 

   We Need Municipal Leadership Now!  

   If the demise of our urban centres is to be reversed, women's fear and victimization must be reduced.  Strong political will is needed to energize local, provincial/territorial, national and international communities. 

   We must build strategies for change rooted in an acceptance of the validity and appropriateness of women's fear.  We must build change through the promotion of women's rights to safety, dignity, respect, justice, empowerment and involvement in the community.  Municipal politicians are connected to the lives of their constituents and are empowered to coordinate and mobilize their communities. 

   How You Can Reduce Women's Fear and Victimization  

   Mobilize your community services  

   Encourage schools and community centres to hold practical self-defence courses for women and children. 

   Provide continuing core funding for agencies providing self-defence courses for women and children.  
   the best doctors money can buy  
  A privileged minority is using private insurance to jump the health-care queue 
  By Kyle Stone 

   Dr. M. is a noted urologist practising in a large Toronto hospital in a suite of offices he shares with several others.  Yet these offices are as quiet as if they were in a private clinic.  The chairs are soft.  The attractive young assistants and secretaries dress well; with patients and doctors alike, they remain honey-voiced and discreet.  Dr. M. and his colleagues specialize in prostate patients, some of them high-profile ones: the offices are full of bankers and lawyers and big investors. 

   Unlike his colleagues, however, Dr. M. is a member of a specialist-referral network, a group of doctors organized and hired by a company known as an independent medical-assessment service.  These companies recruit doctors from big hospitals and small clinics: cardiologists, urologists, psychiatrists, back doctors, ophthalmologists; specialists in livers and kidneys and glands, in impotence and gastrointestinal problems.  They recruit clients too: companies that offer their employees access to the service through the company insurance plan.  The assessment service then sends the employee to one doctor or another within the network.  It promises rapid medical attention, guaranteed. 

   "Rapid medical attention" means calling up a doctor, usually on short notice, and asking if there's a time slot available for, say, a checkup that afternoon.  If a time isn't available with the first member doctor, the assessment service will place the client with another.  But since the doctors are paid, by some estimates, nearly twice as much for some procedures as they would get from the public health-insurance plan, the first doctor called is almost always available.  If an ordinary medicare patient is scheduled for that time slot, and his visit is not a medical emergency, Dr. M.'s secretary will call with the regretful news of the doctor's urgent staff meeting or nasty cold or sudden personal family crisis.  The visit will be postponed, and the matter will stay between the doctor and his secretary, the one who keeps his appointment book. 

   Every so often, someone from Dr. M.'s particular medical-assessment company comes by to drop off some forms for him to fill out.  When Dr. M. hired a new secretary recently, the company's representative came by to tell her about the basic arrangement.  "The basic arrangement," says Fred Holmes, a health-benefits consultant with the firm Towers, Perrin, who is familiar with assessment companies, "is to book some time with a group of specialists.  They say, 'okay, we'll pay you these dollars, and we get bumping privileges in your list.' "  And their clients get to jump the queue.  A health-insurance executive in Waterloo, Ontario, describes assessment companies as having "developed a network of expert bastards that are resident in our [health-care] system, that are prepared to take private billings and do private physicals.  And they've found a legal way to do it."  Indeed they have.  While former office workers describe Dr. M. as "crowing" about all the money he can make this way, they say he is especially proud of one thing - it's all completely legal. 

   Dr. M. is not alone in his desire to make more money.  Caps and clawbacks on their fees have many doctors, particularly specialists, on the warpath.  In Ontario this summer, both obstetricians and orthopaedic surgeons threatened service cuts if the governing Tories didn't revoke these caps, and a coalition of specialists advised its members to stop accepting new patients after October 1. 

   Nor is Dr. M. alone in heeding the siren call of private medical services.  The Canadian Medical Association put private funding for health care - in other words, two-tier medicine - back on the agenda of its annual conference.  (Its members had voted down the issue in 1994.)  Dr. M., though, has found a simpler way into the world of private medicine.  In expansive moments, he's confided that he's found a loophole in the system, one that, as Fred Holmes puts it, "is, or can be, mammoth." 

   The loophole is this: the Canada Health Act guarantees all Canadians universal and equal access to medically necessary services.  But it also contains something called the "Exclusion Paragraph." The Exclusion Paragraph has two main points.  One, if a company pays workers'-compensation premiums, then its employees' job-related injuries and illnesses are paid for by Workers' Compensation, and not by the provincial health-insurance plan.  Two, if an employer, or a life-, disability-, or auto-insurance company requires you to have a medical checkup, that checkup is not considered "medically necessary."  Instead it's called a third-party payer procedure, and, again, provincial health plans won't cover it. 

   Clearly, the Exclusion Paragraph was designed to keep the system honest: Workers' Comp pays for work-related medical problems; third parties - employers and insurers - pay for what they require; and the public system pays for everything else that's medically necessary, for everyone.  Ironically, the Exclusion Paragraph has also served to open a window of opportunity for doctors to make more money than they would in the public system, by doing private or "third-party" work.  That's why specialist-referral networks and medical-assessment services have sprung up and are growing quickly.  OHIP, for instance, pays a doctor $51.40 for a "consultation," $105.40 for a "consultation for respiratory disease."  (Every provincial health plan has its own schedule of fees.)  But if a service is provided on a private basis, the fee is whatever the doctor and the third party, whether it's an insurer or an assessment company, agree to. 

   So doctors have an incentive to look for private work Assessment-service companies operate as middlemen, working between the employer and the doctor, or between the employer's insurance company and the doctor.  (Perhaps because of this, not all insurance companies look kindly on medical-assessment services.  Some prefer to build their own stable of doctors directly.)  There are assessment companies, like Rapid-Med, that work only with life-, auto-, and health-insurance companies, hiring doctors to do pre-employment medicals and the checkups needed for long-term disability-insurance claims.  Others, like Medcan Health Management Inc., offer comprehensive in-house checkups for executives, disability-claims assessment for injured line workers, and a specialist-referral network that in some cases bypasses the insurance company altogether to form its own exclusive triangle: employer, high-ranking executive employee, and specialist-network physician. 

   The idea is to get patients diagnosed faster than provincial medicare can manage.  Of course, if these patients had stayed in the public health-care system, they would be waiting in line precisely because the checkups they need aren't considered medically necessary.  An irony of assessment companies is that they can get their clients a procedure that's not considered urgent faster than one that is. 

   The clients who take advantage of the kind of organized queue-jumping assessment services offer can be divided into several major groups.  There are the employers who are frustrated and want their sick or hurt employee back to work.  They'd also like to make sure the employee isn't just faking it.  There are auto-insurance companies who want their claimants diagnosed as quickly as possible.  And there are employers who provide access to specialist networks as a perk to a select senior-management group. 

   What they get is preferred access to top specialists like Dr. M., and checkups that are more leisurely and that can be more comprehensive than those offered to regular medicare patients.  There is also the benefit, for both patient and doctor, of networking over the stethoscope - of chumminess and social cachet. 

   Dr. Bob Francis has been president of Medcan since the mid-1970s.  As Francis seems to be the godfather of specialist networks, I expected a chat with the Prince of Darkness when I phoned him up.  Instead, he sounded kindly and a little befuddled, more like Mr. Magoo than Dr. Doom.  After outlining his company's specialist-referral network for me, Dr. Francis told me earnestly, "I don't call that two-tiered medicine.  I call that access to care in a meaningful way."  Francis, in other words, claims he's simply helping his clients down a different avenue to certain medical services.  When I asked him if that didn't amount to helping his clients nose in ahead of public patients waiting to see the same doctors, he had clearly been waiting for the question. 

  "The way I answer that is, what's not recognized ... is that he [the doctor] doesn't bump OHIP patients.  OHIP has already decreed that he can see only so many patients per month.  And by he or she seeing one of our patients it actually frees up a spot for another OHIP patient.  So, if anything, it has the reverse effect.  You're also freeing up some dollars.  The person who's coming through our system is actually helping to subsidize the system." 

   Dr. Philip Berger, a family practitioner in downtown Toronto who has cultivated a reputation as a critic of the medical establishment, snorts at the notion that private service speeds the public system along.  "Other people will have a longer, not a shorter, wait, because the doctors aren't available, because the wealthy and the beneficiaries of insurance plans keep pushing themselves in.  If you're standing in line at a movie theatre and someone in a white fox coat hurries to the head of the line and goes inside and calls back over their shoulder, 'see, the line is shorter now,' would you believe it?" 

   Fred Holmes muses: "Yep.  It's delicate ..  You are slipping people in.  But, you know, a doctor has the total choice, in his office practice, to choose who he sees and who he doesn't see, and who he stays late for, and who he slips in first thing in the morning." 

   Those in the medical-assessment business simply do not concede that this causes problems.  Alexander Gourley, president of Health Resource Management Ltd., a "diagnostic and assessment facilitator" that works in Alberta, defends his business in much the same way as Bob Francis, depicting it as a nonthreatening departure from medicare.  HRM, he stresses, covers only diagnostic assessments - which aren't covered under Alberta Health - and not the treatments themselves, which are.  "Any of the services we require are, by definition, uninsured," Gourley says.  "When a patient requires a treatment service covered by a provincial health plan, then they're treated as equally as anyone else.  They bill the Alberta health-insurance plan.  And we don't influence their movement through the queue.  What we're looking for is a return-to-work diagnostic assessment.  Then we negotiate terms and conditions with doctors, as does everyone else." 

   This raises a few questions, however.  Isn't "expediting and facilitating specialist referral" to "establish or confirm diagnosis and duration of disability" as Gourley describes his company's services, still just a nice way to say paying for faster medical attention?  And once a patient has jumped ahead for a referral, isn't his treatment inevitably speeded up as well, even if it is done in the public system?  As Philip Berger, in discussing the private sector's impact on the public one, points out: "A doctor can't sit there and say 'Well, the only reason you're here is because your employer sent you, therefore I'm not going to listen to your chest.  I'm not going to pay attention to the fact you're drenched in sweat and hot.'  You have an obligation to do something for them, if that is the case." 

   And can we really be sure that all these private patients are slipped in at the end of the day, or first thing in the morning, as assessment companies claim?  If they're not, if a regular OHIP patient waiting to have a medically necessary service performed has to wait longer because the doctor's in with someone whose appointment is not medically necessary, common sense says that this amounts to organized queue-jumping, and that it contravenes at least the spirit, if not the letter, of the Canada Health Act.  

   And is there always a hard and fast distinction made between diagnosis and treatment?  Or might doctors, particularly specialists protected by the privacy of their offices, be persuaded to provide a medically necessary service faster, and off-OHIP, as it were, if the price were right? 

   The very existence of this alternative, private avenue to medical service, never mind its growth in recent years, opens the door to all kinds of abuses that are difficult to track.  Jim Pare, Workers' Comp specialist at the Ontario Federation of Labour, says he knows of injured line workers who have been pressured into filing disability-insurance claims rather than filing Workers' Compensation claims, and so receiving a far smaller settlement.  (Because a company's Workers' Comp premiums rise dramatically the more claims it files, it's often cheaper in the long run for the company to do this).  Fred Holmes says he has heard of an assessment service trying to convince companies that, so long as they are paying Workers' Compensation premiums for their line workers, then all their employees are eligible to have their medical services handled outside medicare.  That provides justification, in other words, for having their executives treated by specialist-referral network on a private basis, even for medically necessary services.  "Then you're into a world of illegal acts, as I understand the law," says Holmes.  

   Third-party-payer procedures also create at least the potential for doctors to bill the public system for services performed, and paid for, on a private basis.  Al Gourley, the president of HRM Ltd., insists: "We deal with people who are first class, and whose integrity would never, never allow them to be so compromised."  But the fact remains that there's no way of knowing for sure, and critics charge that, in Ontario at least, the government seems to be little concerned with enforcing third-party-payer procedure laws.  "I have to admit," says Ontario Ministry of Health spokesman Paul Kilbertus, "We're not working too quickly towards it.  But it is something we're committed to doing.  It's never been a grey zone.  It's been clear that we're not supposed to pay ...  In Ontario, the health professions are self-regulating.  If they're billing twice," he concedes, "there's no way we're going to know about it.  Private companies don't tell us what doctors are billing them for."  

   And as for Bob Francis's contention that private service can save the public system money, the opposite is more likely to be the case.  

    INTRODUCTION   

   As our population grows older, profound implications will arise for Canadian society.  Many important public issues are and will be emerging as a result.  

   This booklet is an attempt to profile Canada's seniors as they are and as they see themselves.  It is not intended to provide a comprehensive description, but rather an overall perspective on the seniors population .

   As seniors themselves well know, there are many inaccurate perceptions and even stereotypes about aging in our society.  We often view aging as a process that begins later in life, usually around age 65.  Those who have passed that age, then, are often regarded as passive and dependent, rather than as active and independent members of society. 

   Such generalizations completely miss the fact that aging is a lifelong process which encompasses a whole series of changes from birth to death.  There exists no sudden or artificial transition to old age.  Even many of the changes usually associated with aging, such as greying hair, begin long before seniors status is acquired at age 65. 

   The following presentation will challenge some of the commonly held myths and misperceptions about seniors.  The perspective here is drawn from statistical data, but behind the statistics are the lives of almost three million Canadians who are an integral and dynamic part of our society. 

    1 THE NUMBER OF SENIORS CONTINUES TO GROW   

   The aging of the baby boom generation, combined with a dramatic decline in the birth rate since the early 1960s, will mean further growth in the proportion of Canada's seniors population well into the next century.  Falling mortality rates will also continue adding to the number of seniors.  The proportion of seniors who are over 85 will continue to increase.  But the ratio of women to men, which has grown rapidly since the early 1960s, will decline.  

   In 1986, 2.7 million Canadians were over 65; that's 11 per cent of our population, compared to 6 per cent in 1931. 

   By the year 2031, the percentage of seniors could rise to 22 per cent of the population or 7.5 million Canadians. 

 

   The proportion of seniors in the provinces ranges from 13 per cent in Prince Edward Island, Manitoba and Saskatchewan to 9 per cent in Newfoundland, 8 per cent in Alberta and 4 per cent in the Yukon Territories.  By the year 2000, provincial variations are expected to converge toward the national average. 

   Seniors in Canada constitute a smaller percentage of the population than do seniors in many other industrialized countries.  In Sweden, seniors make up 17 per cent of the population, in the United Kingdom 15 per cent and in the United States 12 per cent. 

   Among seniors, the percentage of those over 80 could grow from 20 per cent in 1986 to 25 per cent in 2001. 

   Life expectancy continues to increase.  Life expectancy at birth for women is 80 years, up from 74 in the early 1960s; for men it is 73 years, up from 68 in the early 1960s. 

   At age 65, a woman can expect to live 19 more years and a man 15 more years. 

   There are 120 women for every 100 men in the 65-69 age group.  Among those 85 and over, there are 229 women for every 100 men. 

 

    2 MUCH DIVERSITY AMONG SENIORS   

   Seniors as a group are not homogeneous.  The differences among them in health, marital status, housing, income and ethnicity are as great as they are among younger Canadians.  The living situations of older women often differ considerably from men of the same age.  As Canadians live longer, this diversity will continue to grow.  The designation of "65 and over" for seniors is becoming increasingly arbitrary. 

   Seniors, like other Canadians, are of different generations, each with their own history of social experiences.  Some, for example, have experienced the First World War; others' memories do not pre-date the Depression.  In addition to a particular set of social experiences, seniors, as a group, differ from younger Canadians in several ways: 

   Eleven per cent of Canadians over 65 speak neither English nor French at home - nearly double the percentage of those under 50. 

   Older Canadians are more likely to be of British origin than are younger ones.  Fifty-five per cent of those 80 and over are of British descent compared to 39 per cent of those under 65. 

   Older Canadians are less likely to be of French origin than are younger ones.  Twenty per cent of those 80 and over are of French descent, compared to 27 per cent of those under 65. 

   Seniors make up 14 per cent of the population of villages with 1000 to 2499 people - a higher concentration than in rural areas and large urban centres. 

   Seventy-seven per cent of men 65 and over are married, compared to 41 per cent of women of the same age. 

   Thirty per cent of women in the 65-69 age group are widowed compared to 6 per cent of men.  By age 90 and over, more than 84 per cent of women are widowed, compared to 54 per cent of men. 

   Between 1961 and 1986, the proportion of women 65 and over living alone doubled from 15 per cent to 34 per cent.  The proportion of men 65 and over living alone increased from 9 per cent to 14 per cent in the same period. 

 

   In 1986 only 2 per cent of seniors between 65 and 69 lived in institutions, compared to 37 per cent of Canadians 85 and over. 

 

   Twenty-eight per cent of men aged 85 and over live in institutions, compared to 40 per cent of women of that age group. 

   3 SENIORS ARE INDEPENDENT - AND INTERDEPENDENT  

   People over 65 are too often viewed as passive and dependent.  In reality, the vast majority are as independent as adults under 65.  Maximum independence for seniors, as for younger adults, is achieved through interdependent living, that is, in mutually supportive relationships with others.   

   Most Canadians receive - and give - a great deal of social support, most of it within their network of family and friends.  Far less is provided through institutions and social services.  When aging creates special needs, seniors want to make choices about the aid required with daily activities, for example, as well as about the support they give to others.   

   A majority of seniors have the financial resources to live in their own homes.  Many seniors also give money to their children.  However, the income of seniors is concentrated at the lower end of the income scale.  

   Fifteen per cent of seniors give babysitting help to friends and family living outside their home. 

   Twenty per cent of seniors need help with grocery shopping and 4 per cent need help with personal care. 

   Eighty per cent of women and 50 per cent of men over 80 do their own housework. 

   Sixty-four per cent of seniors own their own home, most of them mortgage free. 

   Eight per cent of older Canadians live in institutions in which some custody or care is provided. 

   In 1986, 45 per cent of families with heads aged 65 and over had incomes under $20,000, compared to 18 per cent of families with heads under 65. 

   Fifty per cent of single individuals aged 65 and over had incomes under $10,000 in 1986. 

   Income support from governments, including Old Age Security and the Guaranteed Income Supplement (OAS and GIS), is the single largest source of income for people aged 65 and over, providing 40 per cent of the income of older married couples and 58 per cent of the income of unattached individuals 65 and over. 

   Investment income was the second largest source of income for seniors in 1986, accounting for 19 per cent of the income of older couples. 

   Wages and salaries accounted for 21 per cent of the income of families with heads 65 and over and 3 per cent for unattached individuals 65 and over. 

    4 MOST SENIORS ARE HEALTHY   

   Aging and poor health are not synonymous.  In fact, the vast majority of seniors remain healthy enough to live independently.  Most seniors also believe they are in good health, although reported health status differs widely among those with different income and education levels.  Older people drink less, smoke less and have increased their physical fitness more than other age groups.  

   Seniors, as a group, are heavy users of health care facilities, but extended hospital stays occur only among a small proportion of older people.  However, many chronic health conditions usually associated with old age often require longer term care.  

   But the frequent occurrence of specific physiological changes does not mean that seniors are necessarily unhealthy or disabled in any significant way.  When certain activities do become difficult for seniors, changes in the physical and social environment can often compensate for any loss in functional ability.  

   Sixty-seven per cent of seniors aged 65 to 74 said their health was good or excellent.  Fifty-seven per cent of those over 75 believed the same. 

   Women over 65 report somewhat poorer health than men over 65. 

   Seventy per cent of seniors over 65 stated that life was not very or not at all stressful.  Forty-eight per cent of those under 55 said the same. 

   Fifty-six per cent of Canadians aged 65 to 74 report visiting a general practitioner three or more times in the previous year, compared to 40 per cent of those aged 45 to 54. 

   Among older Canadians who consider themselves very poor, 46 per cent say they are in very good or excellent health.  Sixty-eight per cent of seniors who are upper middle class report the same degree of health. 

   Seventy-two per cent of seniors who have completed post-secondary education report that they are in very good or excellent health, compared to 35 per cent of seniors who have an elementary education or less. 

   Nineteen per cent of Canadians over 65 smoke compared to 37 per cent of those under 55.  Eighteen per cent of seniors never drink alcoholic beverages, compared to 6 per cent of adults under 55. 

   The proportion of able-bodied seniors who exercised regularly increased from 50 per cent to 60 per cent between 1976 and 1981.  Increases were considerably less in all other age groups. 

   Seniors account for 49 per cent of hospital patient days.  But a small number of seniors account for most lengthy hospital stays. 

   Fifteen per cent of individuals aged 65 to 74 reported two or more disability days in the past two weeks, compared to 12 per cent of those aged 45 to 54. 

   Two out of three Canadians over 65 say they have no long-term activity limitations.  More specifically, 9 per cent of seniors aged 65 to 74 report that their vision limits their activities and 21 per cent are restricted by their hearing ability. 

   Although 85 per cent of seniors have at least one chronic health problem, this does not affect the majority's ability to function independently. 

    5 SENIORS PARTICIPATE IN SOCIETY   

   When Canadians retire from the work force, their place in society appears completely altered.  But seniors continue to participate in numerous other social and economic activities.  They continue to earn income, spend money on goods, donate money, act as volunteers, vote in elections, use mass media and entertainment, and some are students.  

   The concept of mandatory retirement is being challenged with a view that ability, rather than chronological age, should be the basis for work force participation.  The ability to choose the time of retirement means much less disruption personally.  It also means that age 65 is becoming a much less socially significant transition.  

    Seniors' accumulation of a lifetime of experience and knowledge is far often an under-utilized resource for Canadian society.  As our society ages, older Canadians' contributions will become more important than ever.  

   Labour force participation among men aged 65 to 69 has declined from 25 per cent in 1976 to 18 per cent in 1986.  Participation for women has dropped only slightly, from 8 per cent to 7 per cent during the same period.  </I

 UNDERCURRENTS: 'so there's this guy, see...' 

   'He's at a convention in Vancouver, and he meets this woman in a bar and they sleep together.  And next morning, she kisses him goodbye and gives him an envelope and tells him not to open it until he's on the plane.  And he opens it and there's a card that says, "Welcome to the wonderful world of AIDS."  It's a true story, it happened to a friend of my brother-in-law....' 

   The story currently making the rounds could be true.  Many people who pass it on believe it.  Many of them attest to its accuracy by citing a personal connection - however remote - to the victim.  But the story is, in fact, what some folklore experts call an "urban legend."  Those analysts say that people tell such tales about extraordinary occurrences as if they are true.  As well, the legends nearly always possess a hidden twist - and, sometimes, even a kernel of truth.  Urban legends also tend to go in cycles.  Some that are circulating now appeared in slightly different forms tens, or even hundreds, of years ago.  "Different issues become prominent at different points in time," says Paul Smith, head of the folklore department at Memorial University in St. John's, Nfld.  "No one story has become prominent over time." 

   Jan Brunvand, a folklore professor at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, explains in his book The Vanishing Hitchhiker that classic tales contain three essential elements: the story is basically appealing; there is some foundation in "actual belief"; and there is a message.  Said Smith: "Urban legends allow us to speak out our fears.  Some present morals with a very heavy hand.  Others are light."  What keeps them circulating, generation after generation, are the cries of delight - and the chills of horror - they inspire.  Maclean's has compiled some longtime favorites: 

  The hairy hitchhiker 

   A young woman is driving alone at night on a deserted stretch of road.  She sees a female hitchhiker - and stops.  The hitchhiker tosses a bag onto the backseat and starts to get into the front.  The driver notices that the hitchhiker's hand is large and hairy.  The driver slams the door and drives off.  Later, she opens the bag and finds a bloodstained axe. 

  The surprise party 

   A young, recently engaged couple are babysitting.  After the parents leave, the amorous couple undress.  The mother phones to say that she has forgotten to turn on the washing machine.  Still naked, the young man piggybacks his fiancee downstairs.  There, they encounter their family, friends - and the local priest - who have arranged a surprise party for them. 

  The laughing maniac 

   A teenage girl is babysitting three children, who are upstairs asleep.  She answers the phone and hears a man laughing hysterically.  She hangs up.  Fifteen minutes later, the phone rings again.  It is the same laughing man.  The babysitter phones the operator, who tells her that if he calls again, she should keep him on the line so that the operator can trace the call.  The girl does so.  The operator phones the babysitter and tells her to leave the house because the man is calling from an upstairs phone.  As the girl runs out, she sees the man coming downstairs holding a bloody butcher knife, still laughing.  She phones the police, who arrest the man and find the bodies of the three children. 

  The choking dog 

   A woman comes home and finds her dog lying on the floor, choking.  She drives the dog to a veterinarian, who says that he will call her later.  She returns home.  The vet phones and tells her to leave the house immediately - and that he has called the police.  The woman runs outside.  Later, she learns that the vet found two fingers lodged in the dog's throat.  The police find a man missing two fingers, collapsed in shock in one of the woman's closets. 

  The sneezing elephant 

   A man takes his family to a wildlife park.  The young son opens the electrically operated rear window of the station wagon and the friendly elephant sticks its trunk through it, delighting the children until it sneezes, producing a large volume of fetid gases and semi-liquids.  The terrified son closes the window on the elephant's trunk.  The enraged animal trashes the vehicle until the son releases the trunk and the family narrowly escapes. 

  The helpful wife 

   A man sees a newspaper ad for a used Porsche in excellent condition for only $50.  He rushes to the address and a woman shows him the car.  He pays the woman and asks her why the price was so low.  She explains that her husband had run off with his secretary a few days earlier and had instructed her to sell his car and send him the money. 

   Lovers' lane 

   One night, a man and woman drive to a secluded spot.  While they are embracing, a bulletin comes over the radio that a dangerous, deranged man has escaped from a nearby institution.  The man has an artificial arm.  Later, they hear a noise outside the car.  Terrified, the young man starts the car and speeds away.  When they arrive at the woman's house, they discover a bloody hook hanging one of the car's door handles. 

  Granny's vacation 

   A family on vacation is driving in Mexico with a grandmother, who dies of an apparent heart attack.  To avoid the red tape involved when a person dies in a foreign country, the family wraps her body in a blanket and ties it to the roof rack.  On the way home, they stop at a restaurant.  When they come out, the car is gone. 

  The dare 

   Two men are out canoeing on a beautiful, clear summer day.  For a joke, one man stands on the gunwales, looks up and yells, "Take me now!"  A bolt of lightning kills him. 

  The jealous husband 

   A cement-mixer operator has a job in his own neighborhood and decides to pay a surprise visit to his wife.  To his surprise, he sees an unfamiliar convertible in his driveway.  He peeks through a window and sees his wife talking to a strange man.  Assuming that she is having an affair, the husband fills up the convertible with cement.  It turns out that the man was a car dealer and the convertible was a birthday present for the husband. 

  The new pet 

   A woman vacationing in Mexico buys a Chihuahua.  She smuggles the dog across the border and, once home, takes him to her veterinarian for a checkup.  The vet tells her that the animal is a rat. 

  The turkey dinner 

   Parents leave their baby son with a new babysitter, a teenage girl who seems distracted.  The woman phones from the party and asks whether everything is all right.  The girl says yes and adds that the turkey is in the oven.  The parents rush home in time to save their son only because the girl had not turned the oven on.  She was high on LSD. 

  The underground parking lot 

   A woman leaves work late and goes to the underground parking lot.  She finds a woman in her car slumped over the steering wheel.  The woman says that she is feeling sick and asks the other woman to drive her home.  The nervous car owner excuses herself and goes to phone her husband.  He tells her not to go back to the car and says that he is going to phone the police.  They find that the woman in the car is really a man.  They also find a bloody axe under the driver's seat. 

  The vanishing child 

   A woman has taken her young son to Disneyland and, as she is standing in line to buy tickets, she briefly turns away from him.
  When she looks back, the child is gone.  She alerts security.  Twenty minutes later, a guard returns with the child, whose blond hair is now black.  The guards have caught a man coming out of a washroom with the child and found a container of dye.  </I

   DEATH DEFINED: Controversy rages over how-to suicide books 

   During the past 2 years, Marjorie Wantz, a former teacher's aide, has been tormented by pelvic pain that never stops.  From her bed in Detroit's Sinai Hospital, the 58-year-old woman said last week that she has undergone 10 operations but doctors have still not determined the cause of the pain.  Wantz, a mother of two, said that constant suffering has driven her to make two attempts to take her own life.  She also said that she has tried to follow the advice contained in Final Exit, a detailed guide on how to commit suicide published in March by the Eugene, Ore.-based Hemlock Society, which promotes legalized euthanasia.  On Aug. 18, the book reached the top of The New York Times list of best-selling advice and how-to books.  But Wantz described Final Exit as a disappointment.  She added: "It tells you to use Seconal, but you can't get it unless a doctor writes a prescription for you." 

   According to many doctors and legal experts, the popularity of Final Exit reflects a growing public preoccupation with terminal illness.  But some of the experts contend that the book's author, Derek Humphry, founder of the 42,000-member Hemlock Society, represents the radical fringe of the debate in North America about euthanasia and the rights of the terminally ill.  They say that a more accurate measure of public opinion will emerge from a Washington state plebiscite on Nov. 5.  Voters will be asked to approve or reject a proposed law that would make Washington the first American state to let doctors help terminally ill patients end their lives.  In Canada, meanwhile, two members of Parliament have introduced private members' bills dealing with euthanasia.  One would strengthen a patient's right to refuse treatment, while the second would allow terminally ill patients to take their lives after appearing before a government-appointed referee. 

   The success of Final Exit has injected new vigor into the debate over euthanasia.  The 192-page book examines in clinical detail various ways of committing suicide.  One chapter, entitled "Death Hollywood Style," describes an unreliable suicide method popularized by movies in which an individual injects air into his veins.  Another chapter, called "Bizarre Ways to Die," describes death by rattlesnake bite and by driving a car into a tree.  The book recommends neither method.  According to Humphry, the best method, because it is quick, clean and painless, is to take an overdose of barbiturates on an empty stomach and accompanied by alcohol. 

   The $23.50 book is distributed and promoted by New York City-based Carol Publishing Group.  Carol's 34-year-old publisher, Steven Schragis, a co-founder, with Toronto-born Graydon Carter, of the New York-based satirical magazine Spy, said that he was eager to help promote Final Exit because he belongs to the Hemlock Society.  Initially, Carol Publishing printed a total of 40,000 copies of the book, of which about one-half were sold by mail order through the Hemlock Society.  Humphry said that Carol sent 300 review copies to media outlets across the United States, but no reviews appeared.  Then, on July 12, The Wall Street Journal published an article about the book, and within 10 days bookstores had sold the entire first edition.  Hemlock and Carol are now printing another 125,000 copies, and Schragis said that bookstores have already placed orders for 227,000. 

   Two major Canadian bookstore chains, Cole's The Book People and W.H. Smith Classics, were both awaiting delivery of their first copies last week.  Cole's president Thomas Bryden said that he expects to have the book in most of Cole's 236 stores by early September.  Said Charlotte Caplan, a book buyer with the 180-store Smith chain: "There has been an incredible demand for it." 

   The second printing of Final Exit is likely to begin reaching bookstores just as another potentially controversial book on suicide is published.  On Sept. 2, Buffalo, N.Y.-based Prometheus Books plans to publish Dr. Jack Kevorkian's Prescription: Medicide, subtitled The Goodness of Planned Death.  Kevorkian, who lives in a Detroit suburb, is the inventor of a so-called suicide machine.  He gained international attention in June, 1990, when Janet Adkins, a 54-year-old Portland, Ore., woman who had been diagnosed as having Alzheimer's disease, killed herself in a community outside Detroit while attached to his machine.  When she pressed a button, the device injected a lethal quantity of potassium chloride into one of her veins.  

   Kevorkian is a man with a mission.  He told Maclean's last week that he is determined to create a new medical specialty called obitiatry.  </I

  FAST TRACK TO FAILURE: experts study the perils of work addiction 

   During the success-oriented 1980s, the term "workaholic" was often a positive term used to describe fast-track baby boomers who earned their corporate reputations with long hours and a tireless devotion to detail.  They carried bulging briefcases, worked late and sacrificed their weekends in the hope of promotions, higher - and higher profits for their employers.  But some psychologists now say that for some people, the relentless pursuit of on-the-job perfection actually results in diminished productivity.  Indeed, some experts say that eventually, workaholics can lose their sense of control over their work and their lives.  When that occurs, the person who is addicted to work can turn moody, become prone to rages and alienate his or her family, friends and colleagues.  Said Barbara Killinger, a Toronto psychologist: "At their worst, workaholics are soulless - there's nothing inside, they have lost their integrity." 

   According to Killinger, whose book Workaholics: The Respectable Addicts was published by Key Porter Books in April, workaholics are men or women who are addicted to working and who, as a result, experience personality changes.  Yet despite the sometimes alarming consequences of the addiction, Killinger says that the problem is still widely misunderstood.  She and other experts say that an increasing number of people are seeking treatment for workaholism.  Because the addiction takes hold so slowly, Killinger said that co-workers and spouses tend to dismiss the early symptoms of workaholism - anxiety, irritability and restlessness - as the temporary side effects of overwork. 

   At the same time, Kenneth Des Roches, an Ottawa-based employment counsellor with Peat Marwick Stevenson & Kellogg, a management consulting firm, says that employers sometimes make the problem worse by assuming that someone with workaholic attributes will be a model employee.  By giving a workaholic more responsibility and prestige, says Des Roches, who regularly counsels individuals suffering from workaholism, employers can unwittingly push the workaholic too far.  Still, Des Roches says that the main problem is the obsession itself.  "People get a high from their work, and it becomes something of a vortex that they get caught up in," he said.  "Before long, they need it, and they don't want to live without it." 

   Although the word "workaholism" has been in use for only about 20 years, psychologists say that the addiction has existed for much longer.  They add that the problem has recently gained greater recognition because people in the largest segment of the North American population, those between the ages of 25 and 45, are at the stage in their careers when, according to Des Roches, workaholism "tends to get to people."  But Bart, a recovering Vancouver workaholic who at one time juggled a full-time job and a private business during 18-hour days, told Maclean's that his addiction began in his childhood.  Bart, 55, who asked that his last name be withheld, said that it was only by stopping work completely that he was able to deal with his workaholism.  "Work is a way of avoiding your feelings, like booze or drugs," he said.  "Work gives you the feeling that you're in control." 

   Killinger, who has studied workaholism for eight years, says that the classic workaholic starts off as a perfectionist who desperately needs the approval of others.  Over time, she says, working becomes a compulsion and, finally, a single-minded pursuit of self-glorification that can lead to emotional problems and personality changes.  Striving for power and control, workaholics suffer from chronic fatigue and guilt, are racked by fears and sometimes even become incapable of distinguishing right from wrong.  For her part, Susan Butt, a psychologist at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, says that workaholics reach the crisis stage when they begin to lose control over their lives.  When that happens to workaholics, says Butt, "they lose their sense of well-being." 

   According to Killinger, workaholics are capable of lying, cheating and, in extreme cases, violence if it serves their purposes.  Increasingly bound to their work, yet feeling out of control, they may become impatient with their children and lash out at their spouses.  "More and more," said Killinger, "I am realizing how much damage is done to the spouse." 

   According to Des Roches, companies and their employees have to recognize workaholism as a risk factor in order to prevent it from causing problems in the workplace.  "Many companies are beginning to realize that being obsessed with work is counterproductive," he said.  Individual employees, he added, must learn to work within realistic limits and not rely on work to feed their egos.  Otherwise, the successes gained from overwork can ultimately lead to painful failure. 

   Killinger says that many work addicts can be cured if they get help early.  Most important, she said, was for them to gain an understanding of their own feelings, and a realization of how their addiction has harmed their families and friends.  "In most cases, what they have left behind is a pile of broken lives," she said.  Killinger added that if workaholics can feel remorse for the damage they have done, then they can usually recover.  But, for the minority of workaholics who are unable to do that, the future is likely to turn into a fast track to failure, both on and off the job.  </I

   OBSESSED WITH SEX: self-help groups treat sexual addiction 

   The slender, intense young man, with wire-rimmed glasses and impeccably groomed hair, says that he has a solid marriage, two happy children and a rewarding job.  But, for three years, the Toronto computer technician found that he increasingly wanted to have sex with prostitutes.  After finishing his night shift at a downtown office, he said, he would drive along streets that he knew prostitutes favored.  He said that he watched them, regularly talked to them and occasionally paid for their services.  But, he said, by early last year he had become convinced that his obsession was out of control, and he began seeing a psychotherapist.  While he chose to turn to a professional for help, thousands of other North American men and women have chosen a different way of dealing with similar obsessions.  They have joined self-help groups, modelled on Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), to overcome what they regard as a damaging and potentially dangerous problem: so-called sexual addiction. 

   The self-help approach to sexual problems began to flourish during the late 1970s and, since then, three major organizations have emerged: Boston-based Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous (SLAA), Minneapolis-based Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA) and California-based Sexaholics Anonymous (SA).  All of them have members in Canada, although they are reluctant to disclose details about their activities.  One of the leading proponents of the theory that sexual activity can be addictive is Patrick Carnes, a Minneapolis-based family therapist.  He operates an in-patient clinic that treats people he describes as sexually addicted individuals.  "Sex addicts do things even though it may cost them their marriage, their job and lots of money," Carnes told Maclean's.  "They use sex as a way to deal with pain." 

   Indeed, individuals who claim to be sexually addicted frequently admit that their sexual behavior is partly due to other personal problems.  A 31-year-old Minneapolis man named Bob, who has been a member of SAA for two years, said that he was a victim of incest as a child and later developed alcohol and drug problems.  The man said that he is bisexual and, before joining SAA, sometimes had daily sexual encounters.  He admitted that he visited homosexual bathhouses and massage parlors for anonymous sex, and occasionally purchased sex from prostitutes of both sexes.  Now, said Bob, "I don't go to bathhouses, massage parlors, bars or any place that might tempt me." 

   But many mental health professionals dispute the notion that sex can be addictive and warn that treatment based on the AA model should be accompanied by professional therapy.  Sidney Folb, a Toronto psychologist who has treated people with addictions and sexual problems for 20 years, said that excessive sexual activity is frequently connected to drug or alcohol abuse.  He added that he has rarely encountered anyone whose only problem is compulsive sexual behavior.  Howard Ruppel, a former sex therapist who is now executive director of the Iowa-based Society for the Scientific Study of Sex, also expressed skepticism about sexual addiction.  Said Ruppel: "It incredibly oversimplifies the issues.  I see this as a catchy, marketable tool that some people are using to encourage negative attitudes about sex." 

   But those who are involved with self-help groups dismiss the criticism of therapists and psychologists.  The manager of SAA's national office in Minneapolis, a 29-year-old man who identified himself only as Douglas, said that he joined the organization four years ago.  Before that, he said, he was obsessed by pornography and was constantly cheating on girlfriends by looking for other sexual partners.  He added: "I felt compelled to do what I was doing.  Sex addicts experience powerlessness over their sexual behavior.  Other people don't."  Douglas said that since joining SAA, he has dated eight women but became sexually involved with only one. 

   The self-help groups rely on the 12-step program first developed by AA to deal with alcoholism.  The same principles have been applied to a number of other problems, including drug addiction, compulsive gambling and overeating.  Among other things, the AA program urges participants to admit that they are powerless to control their problem.  They are advised to make an inventory of the wrongs that they have committed and the people whom they have hurt.  As well, participants are urged to accept the existence of a god, or some form of "higher power," and to try to rely on that power to help overcome their problems. 

   The major difference among the three main groups that deal with people who are excessively sexually active is in their definitions of "sexual sobriety."  Two of the groups, SAA and SLAA, attract a few homosexuals, while SA's rigid approach tends to discourage gay participation.  The most conservative, and secretive, group is SA, which was founded in 1979 and is based in Simi Valley, Calif., about 60 km north of Los Angeles.  A woman called Nan, who described herself as an executive secretary, said during a telephone interview that SA members must refrain from any type of sexual activity outside "a traditional, legal, heterosexual marriage."  She said that there are SA groups across the United States and in Canada, Europe and South America.  But she declined to disclose the number of groups or total membership. 

   A woman employee at SLAA's national office in Boston said that the organization has 850 groups, mostly in the United States and Canada.  She said that SLAA allows its members to create their own definition of sexual sobriety.  "Everybody comes into a group with different behavior that is making their life unmanageable," said the woman, who declined to give her name, "so you create your own bottom line."  A Toronto spokesman named Peter said that there are several SLAA groups in the city. 

   SAA, which has groups in Vancouver, Winnipeg and Ottawa, also allows its members to define sexual sobriety in consultation with other members.  Douglas, the manager of the national office in Minneapolis, said that SAA has 350 groups across the United States.  He added that about 80 per cent of the participants are male.  "When people get into recovery, they're generally not in great shape," said Douglas.  "They've usually suffered major consequences, such as divorce, job loss or arrest." 

   During the past six years, about 1,700 patients have checked into the 50-bed Sexual Dependency Unit at the Golden Valley Health Center near Minneapolis.  Family therapist Carnes, who is founder of the unit, said that 35-day program that he supervises involves group discussions about excessive sexual behaviour and instruction by physicians and psychotherapists on such subjects as healthy sexuality and the causes of addictive behavior.  Carnes said that full recovery from sexual addiction can take up to five years.  

   According to Carnes, self-described sex addicts often share common backgrounds and personality traits.  A book by Carnes, entitled Don't Call It Love, which will be published in March, is based on a survey of 1,000 recovering sex addicts.  Carnes said that 83 per cent of the people he surveyed had a second addiction, usually alcohol or drugs, and a similar percentage said that they had experienced sexual abuse as children.  He also found that 27 per cent of the sex addicts he talked to had been dismissed from jobs, demoted or arrested as a result of their sexual behavior.  </I<I
  Choosing judges in private 

   By his own admission, Willard Estey was a compromise choice for the Supreme Court of Canada.  "They happened to need a guy from Ontario and they couldn't agree on who," recalled Estey of his 1977 appointment to the Supreme Court bench just nine months after becoming Ontario's chief justice.  The deadlock was resolved, said Estey, who at the time was reluctant to leave the Ontario court, by "grabbing the Ontario chief justice."  Now retired from the Supreme Court and practising law in Toronto, the highly regarded former judge added: "I got moved into that job the same way I was moved around by the Air Force during the war."  And Estey, like all other justices of Canada's top court, began his new job without being subjected to the public examination that U.S. Supreme Court nominees have to undergo according to the American Constitution. 

   Canadian Supreme Court judges are named by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister.  The only fixed requirements are that at least three of the judges must be members of the Quebec bar, and that any appointee must have been a member of a Canadian bar for at least 10 years.  As well, all federal judges have been screened since 1967 by the Canadian Bar Association and, since 1988, by a five-member advisory committee made up of federal and provincial legal authorities that privately assesses candidates. 

   In practice, the power to shape the composition of the Supreme Court has rested with the prime minister, who is under no legal obligation to follow the advisory committee's recommendations.  Since Prime Minister Brian Mulroney took office in 1984, he has appointed eight of the nine current justices, and some Canadians have complained that the present appointment process could allow a prime minister to stack the court with political friends.  As a result, some critics of the system have urged the introduction of a public review process for prospective justices.  Said Frederick Vaughan, a political science professor at Ontario's University of Guelph: "With the introduction of the charter of rights in 1982, these people exercise extraordinary power.  They should undergo some measure of public scrutiny by our legislators. " 

   But other experts contend that such a process would merely graft another element of the U.S. political system onto Canada's parliamentary form of government.  And even those calling for changes to the system, including Vaughan, acknowledge that all Supreme Court justices since the 1960s have been well qualified.  "The legal community does a very good job of regulating itself and weeding out bad lawyers," said Vaughan.  But as the influence of the Supreme Court grows, calls for an open review of new judges may increase. 
 </I

 <I
  THE WAR OF THE SEXES: new calls for rules on sexual harassment 

   The 44-year-old black woman, who took her complaint to Ontario's Workers' Compensation Board, said that she was constantly harassed during a six-year period in the 1980s by male co-workers at the Colgate-Palmolive Canada soap factory in the Toronto area.  The woman, whose name was not made public, worked on a packing line and said that men there would frequently leave obscene drawings in her locker, make racist and sexist remarks and, in one incident, gave her a piece of soap carved in the form of a penis.  Despite a complaint to her union and to the company's management, the woman said that she received little support and eventually suffered a nervous breakdown.  In June, 1990, in a precedent-setting decision, the Workers' Compensation Board hearings officer ordered the company to pay an as-yet-undetermined amount for illnesses that stemmed from the stress of enduring sexual harassment on the job.  Colgate officials vowed to fight the award, but late last month withdrew their appeal.  The landmark case opened up another avenue complaint for victims of sexual harassment in the workplace.  Still, many experts say that it remains widespread in Canadian society - and often is not dealt with seriously enough. 

   The dramatic confrontation this month between University of Oklahoma law professor Anita Hill and her former employer, U.S. Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas, focused new attention on the issue.  After Hill testified before the Senate judiciary committee in Washington that Thomas harassed her by repeatedly asking for dates, boasting of his sexual prowess and describing pornographic movies, the Senate last week ratified Thomas's appointment to the court by a vote of 52 to 48. 

   For its part, the Supreme Court of Canada, in deciding a case in 1989, defined sexual harassment as "unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature that detrimentally affects the work environment or leads to adverse job-related consequences for the victims of the harassment."  According to studies carried out in the United States and Canada, sexual harassment in the workplace affects an estimated 80 to 90 per cent of women at some point in their lives.  (Only a small number of men ever complain of sexual harassment.)  In 1990, federal and provincial human rights commissions received hundreds of complaints of sexual harassment in the workplace.  Said Maxwell Yalden, chief commissioner of the federal human rights commission: "It is a problem that is very much present and very much felt by women across the country."  He added: "Whatever the numbers are, it's a shattering experience for the individual." 

   Telling jokes, putting an arm around a co-worker or asking a colleague for a date is not, according to experts in the field, unacceptable behavior in the right context.  But they concede that what does constitute sexual harassment in the workplace is difficult for some people to grasp.  Experts say that the offending behavior typically takes one of two forms.  The first occurs when there is an implied or explicit link between requested sexual favors and a promotion or job security.  The second form of harassment occurs when a person - particularly a superior - subjects an employee to unwelcome attentions that create a poisoned, uncomfortable or hostile working environment.  "It is much more subtle than most people think," said lawyer and criminologist Judith Osborne, harassment policy co-ordinator at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby, B.C.  "It's not always the blatant touching, feeling or making sexual requests.  It's often wrapped up as a joke - often not a very funny joke."  Osborne added: "In many workplaces, those kinds of off-color conversations - the sort of dissecting of people's sex lives - is seen as being the regular Monday-morning conversation." 

   Many experts say that the reason sexual harassment has become more of an issue in recent years is the increasing number of women in the workforce.  The resulting change in rules for workplace behavior, they add, has confused many men.  "Men say, 'Anyone could accuse me of sexual harassment and I didn't mean to do it at all,' " said Nancy Adamson, co-ordinator for the status of women and a sexual-harassment adviser at Carleton University in Ottawa.  "I say, think about whether you would like someone to do this to your mother, your daughter, your wife.  And if you feel uneasy at all about the behavior, stop it."  Adamson and others concede that it is difficult to make people fully understand the seriousness of sexual harassment.  Added Adamson: "There's no reverse situation.  You can't say to men, 'Imagine if a woman were doing this to you.'  It's not the same thing. " 

   Still, some critics maintain that existing definitions of sexual harassment are too vague and can have the effect of trapping innocent people.  "When is a look a leer?" said Howard Levitt, a Toronto lawyer who specializes in wrongful-dismissal suits.  "When is an invitation to dinner a come-on?"  Levitt also claims that the potential exists for people to frivolously accuse someone of sexual harassment.  Explained Levitt: "The very fact of the allegation is so destructive to their career that the person who is being accused is likely to pay a tremendous amount of money to keep the accuser quiet." 

   The effects of genuine sexual harassment on a victim can be devastating according to experts.  "It has a real, sinister, debilitating kind of effect on one's self-esteem," said Debi Forsyth-Smith, president of the Halifax-based Nova Scotia Advisory Council on the Status of Women.  "People say, 'Why is this happening to me?'  And sexual harassment generally happens in isolation, behind a closed door when nobody else is around."  As well, victims are often harassed by superiors.  Said Adamson: "When you are in a position of power and you start touching or making sexual jokes or innuendoes, those under you have to think about their position before they challenge your behavior." 

   Following through with a formal complaint in Canada can be a daunting and lengthy process for sexual-harassment victims.  According to Yalden, the victim will usually file a complaint with the federal or provincial human rights commission against both the alleged harasser and the employer (under Canadian law, employers have a responsibility for a harassment-free workplace).  If officials believe that there are grounds for the complainant's case, they will begin gathering evidence. 

   Throughout the process, Yalden explained, the commission will make every attempt to arrive at an informal settlement between the parties.  If none can be reached, the commission will, if warranted, appoint a conciliator to try to find a settlement.  Failing that, a tribunal can be established to hear testimony in public.  Finally, the board reaches a conclusion and issues an order, which could involve the awarding of financial damages, the reinstatement of a job or the granting of a promotion that was previously denied as a result of the complainant's refusal to comply with the harasser's demands.  The employer and the individual charged with harassment could then appeal the commission's decision before the courts.  In some cases, the process can take years before all the appeals have been heard and a final ruling has been rendered. 

   Some experts maintain that victims of sexual harassment in the workplace are not served well under the current system.  Because sexual harassment is not a criminal offence, a complainant has no recourse but to go to a human rights commission.  In most provinces, commissions have large backlogs of cases.  Another problem, according to Levitt, is that the commissions tend to "give notoriously puny awards for anything other than proof of economic loss."  Financial damages typically range from $250 to $3,000.  Indeed, the consequences of filing a complaint may outweigh the benefits.  Complainants, said Levitt, "have to go to the human rights commission, make a complaint, prove they're harassed, wait a number of years and, even if they win, it might be difficult to get a job somewhere else because they're seen as shit-disturbers."  But ultimately, experts agree, most victims of sexual harassment are really only seeking one thing: for the offensive behavior to stop. 
 </I

 <I
  BLACKENED BLUE: scandal strikes the Edmonton police force 

   Edmonton Police Chief Douglas McNally seemed shaken last week when he appeared in public at his headquarters.  Just 3 hours earlier, Edmonton detectives had arrested one of their own, Const. Roy Gordon Lawrence, 33, in a car a few blocks from his home in St. Albert, a suburb of the Alberta capital.  Charged with kidnapping and sexually assaulting two eight-year-old boys and a 10-year-old girl, Lawrence was immediately suspended without pay from his beat at the West Edmonton Mall shopping centre.  McNally, who said that he and the Edmonton police force were embarrassed by the case, declared that the matter was an "isolated incident" and insisted that the vast majority of his officers possessed "high moral standards."  But some Edmontonians expressed concern.  "You teach your kids that the police are their friends and you go to them when you are in trouble," said Guy L'Heureux, 38, an Edmonton housepainter.  "Then something like this happens." 

   Lawrence's arrest followed several recent scandals that McNally acknowledged had shaken public confidence in the Edmonton force.  Twice during the past two months, city policemen have been charged with drinking-and-driving-related offences.  And in June, Const. Jens Goldgrabe, 30, was sentenced to six years in prison after being convicted of sexually assaulting a suspected shoplifter.  Goldgrabe, whom McNally called "a disgrace to the uniform," had forced the handcuffed woman to perform oral sex on him and call him "master."  In another incident the previous month, a judge authorized private charges of assault and torture against three police officers who allegedly roughed up a 32-year-old man on the steps of a courthouse in May, 1990. 

   Other scandals have also hit the Edmonton police force in recent years.  In 1989, Const. Jerry Donovan, 34, who had been charged with the sexual assault of a female officer in 1988, shot and killed his wife, Const. Shannon Donovan, 28, before fatally shooting himself.  In the same year, Hans Bredeman, 40, a 17-year veteran of the department, was sentenced to 15 years in prison after being convicted of devising a plan that resulted in his mistress shooting and injuring his wife, Faye. 
 
