   The Sky's no limit: Astronomy at UVic  

  by Stephen Stamp

   If there is a common thread among the astronomers at UVic, it is the sense that they find the universe so awe-inspiring that they have no choice but to try to learn its secrets and to try to communicate their findings and their sense of awe to others.  Their activities range from lab instructor Russ Robb demonstrating the power of the sun for high school students by burning a pencil with a telescope, to Dr. Chris Pritchet determining the distance of quasars millions of light-years away. 

   The diversity and quality of astronomy research being conducted at UVic is among the reasons that the Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics (HIA) of the National Research Council plans to relocate four of its sections to the university from their present location in Ottawa.  The Institute is still awaiting final approval for the move, but the government of B.C. has committed $22 million for the construction of a new building on campus to house it.  The HIA was established in 1975 and is a significant world-class centre for space sciences and astrophysics.  The HIA cited the work of UVic's astronomers and their links with other institutions such as the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (DAO), which is a section of the HIA, as primary reasons why it wishes to move to UVic.  This move would bring about 100 more professional scientists and support staff to the university and would create an improved environment for UVic's already admirable graduate and undergraduate programs in physics and astronomy. 

   The roots of UVic's astronomy program can be traced to Saskatchewan in the 1920s and '30s .  A young John Climenhaga would lie in a field on his parents' farm and stare upwards, captivated by the beauty and wonder of the sky.  "I've had a long-standing interest in the stars since I was a boy," Climenhaga says, and "Saskatchewan's clear, transparent sky" was perfect for viewing them. 

   Climenhaga believes that "it's human curiosity to want to find out how the universe functions.  You want to understand the physical universe.  If you're a sheep or a cow, you probably don't worry about it. "  For much of his early life, Climenhaga didn't have much time to worry about it, either.  He helped his father run the family farm for several years before enrolling at the University of Saskatchewan at the age of 25, where he earned his B.Sc. in honours math and physics.  He taught at Regina College while completing his master's degree and then took a job at Victoria College in 1949, at age 33.  At the time, he was one of only two physics instructors at the college. 

   In Victoria, his interest in the sky was rekindled when he worked as a summer research assistant at the DAO.  The lure was strong enough that in 1954 Climenhaga took a two-year unpaid leave of absence to earn his Ph.D. in astronomy from the University of Michigan.  Two years after returning to victoria College, he became the first head of the Department of Physics, a post he held for 11 years. 

   During that time, Climenhaga convinced the university administration to add an astronomy component to the physics department.  The first astronomy courses were introduced in 1964, shortly after Victoria College had become UVic.  He continued to instruct students and conduct research full-time until his retirement in 1982.  He was Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science from 1969-72.  Since his retirement, Climenhaga has continued his research and has taught courses in the Department of Physics and Astronomy most years. 

   As impressive as his academic record has been, Climenhaga has earned an equally illustrious reputation as a researcher.  His primary focus has been on the carbon 12 to carbon 13 ratio in carbon stars, which are stars with an enhanced abundance of carbon.  By studying the nuclear reactions in a star and measuring how much carbon 13 is present, one can learn about how heat is produced in the star. 

   Climenhaga has also worked with Dr. Jan Smolinski of the Copernicus Astronomical Centre in Torun, Poland, studying super-giant stars.   To demonstrate how enormous one of these stars is, Climenhaga explains that if the centre of one were at the centre of our sun, the outer edge would be around Mars.  The pair of astronomers has concentrated on interesting features of super-giants' spectra, which sometimes involve two or three gaseous envelopes expanding outwards at different rates. 

   The extent to which Climenhaga is respected by his peers is shown by the honours which he has received.  Upon his retirement in 1982, the dome and astronomy laboratory on top of the Elliott Building were named for him.  In 1985, an asteroid was officially named Minor Planet No. 3034 Climenhaga, in honour of his research, his academic record, and his importance in establishing the astronomy program at UVic. 

   That program has grown to include several world-class astronomers.  Dr. Don VandenBerg is an Associate Professor and is recognized as one of the world's premier theorists in the evolution of stars.  In 1989, he received the E.W.R. Steacie Award, one of the most prestigious awards for science and engineering in Canada.  VandenBerg says that "a star can be modelled by solving a number of fairly straightforward differential equations, though a thorough understanding of nuclear physics and thermodynamics is required." 

   VandenBerg has developed a sophisticated code that creates computer-generated models of stars.  These models allow astronomers to determine with great precision, among other things, the ages of stars, by simulating their evolution.  For example, with VandenBerg's models one can follow the sun from its beginning, when it was just a ball of gases with no nuclear reactions occurring, to its present state.  He can then theorize what will happen in the next five to 10 billion years. 

   To those who may wonder why he wants to look billions of years into the past or future, VandenBerg says that he is "just overwhelmed by the idea that relatively simple equations can describe so much about the universe.  I find it almost unbelievable that one can understand as well as one does something as complicated as the sun."  It is the pure pursuit of knowledge that attracts him to astronomy.  He also likens the aesthetic pleasure of his work to that of a musician's. 

   VandenBerg says that he is "on the fence between theory and observation."  Collaborating extensively with the DAO, he does very little observing himself.  Rather, he engages in critical comparison of observation and theory.  Thanks in large part to VandenBerg's research, theoretical models are now becoming more and more sophisticated and more closely tied to observations.  This correspondence allows astronomers to view estimates of the ages of stars with much more confidence.  In fact, the ages VandenBerg has derived for stars are now used worldwide as the standard ages, and his work has led astronomers to regard his estimate of 14 billion years for the age of the universe as quite reliable. 

   While VandenBerg has been trying to establish the age of the universe, colleague Dr. Chris Pritchet has been busy determining its size.  The final answer has not been found yet, Pritchet says, "but give us two or three years and I think we'll be able to tell you."  

   Pritchet studies galaxies, both very distant and closer, to establish a distance scale of the universe; that is, how far apart objects are from each other.  He says that because the universe is expanding, the distances are increasing.  This leads to the conclusion that the universe was once compressed, until the build-up of heat caused a giant explosion which has become known as the Big Bang.  The force of the explosion has been pushing the edges of the universe outward ever since. 

   Because of the great distances involved in his research, Pritchet says that a characteristic of his work is that he uses very big telescopes.  Rather than creating photographic plates in telescopes to produce images of the objects he views, Pritchet primarily relies on a charge coupled device (commonly called a CCD) which turns images into data on silicon chips.  Those data can then be fed into Pritchet's computer to be reduced, converting them to a format in which they can be used for calculations.  Pritchet says that "for every night observing, I probably spend 10 nights or more reducing data." 

   "Things are happening very quickly in astronomy now," Pritchet says, "because of advances in detector, telescope, and computer technology.  We could hardly do anything if we didn't have complex computers to reduce data."  An example of the advancing technology is a project in which Pritchet is involved which would see Canada, the United States, and Britain work together to build and operate two of the largest telescopes in the world (approximately eight metres in diameter) over the next 10 years.  Pritchet has also worked on the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope in Hawaii and, along with VandenBerg and Dr. David Hartwick, has time booked on the Hubble space telescope.  This telescope was launched by NASA in 1989 and is expected to produce extremely accurate images. 

   NASA is working to overcome current problems which at present make the Hubble useless for many astronomical purposes.  This prospect is exciting, Pritchet says, because a space telescope eliminates the distortion caused by the earth's atmosphere and thus provides much sharper images. 

   Pritchet calls astronomy "intrinsically a very exciting science.  There is some of the same beauty and elegance in modern astronomical science that can be found, though in a completely different form, in such things as productions in the fine arts. " 

   Hartwick, who has been at UVic since 1968, has made breakthroughs in determining the mass of galaxies.  It used to be believed that the mass of the Milky Way was 10 11 times that of the sun, but thanks in large part to Hartwick we now know that it is at least 10 times bigger than that.  He was part of a group of scientists who proved that about 90 percent of the matter in the galaxy is "dark matter," which can't be observed by telescopes.  This discovery has radically altered estimates of the mass of the universe as a whole. 

   Dr. Colin Scarfe came to UVic in 1965 primarily because of its association with the DAO and says that he has probably put in more observing time at the DAO than any other outside observer.  The major emphasis in his work involves determining basic astrophysical quantities of binary stars, including their stellar masses and radial velocities.  Scarfe measures the Doppler shift, which is the shift in a star's spectrum due to its motion.  For over 20 years he has also run a program from Climenhaga Observatory to study period changes in binary stars which eclipse each other.  He uses a photometre attached to the main telescope to time the eclipses and record the times at which the light is faintest. 

   Dr. Ann Gower has been a member of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at UVic since 1973.  She also sees a connection between astronomy and the arts.  "Beginning to achieve an understanding of the universe makes one appreciate it more, just as getting to know about the theory of music lets you appreciate Chopin's music even more." 

   Gower is an expert in radio astronomy.  This involves studying very distant quasars and galaxies which give out an unusually high intensity of radio waves.  She often works with the Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico, making radio images of objects.  Of particular interest is what brought about the existence of the radio galaxies. [This image of the Andromeda galaxy was generated by the Climenhaga Observatory's charge coupled device (CCD), which replaces photographic plates in telescopes and provides images more quickly.  The CCD can pick up asteroids up to 10 times fainter than the old method could.  It was purchased with university funds for the fourth-year astronomy laboratory course.  The department got the device this summer and immediately put it to use to produce this image.  The Andromeda galaxy is approximately 2.2 million light-years away from earth, making it one of the closest galaxies to our own. Photo courtesy of the Climenhaga Observatory.]  Another interesting aspect is the common occurrence in radio galaxies of jets shooting out from either side of the core of a galaxy.  At the core is an object which may be a black hole.  A passing galaxy may disturb material near it and cause it to fall into the hole, releasing tremendous amount of energy which may power the jets.  There are a large number of people in the field, trying to find out how and why the process occurs.  

   "The feeling of studying the distant universe is so awe-inspiring," Gower says.  She also finds that students are very interested in astronomy.  "I love teaching, working with students," Gower says.  An indication of how devoted she is to the task can be seen on the first day of each course she instructs.  She brings her camera to class and photographs each student to help her learn their names.  But carrying out her own research is also very important to Gower, both for its own sake and because it renews her excitement and enthusiasm to return to the classroom and pass on to students how exciting the world of astronomy is.  </I

   THE LIVING PRAIRIE MUSEUM  
   Keeping the tall-grass prairie alive and well in the heart of Winnipeg  
   By George R. Kynman  

   It's the middle of a hot and breezy summer afternoon on the prairie and all around the hum of grass-hoppers, crickets and sparrows drones on.  A small group of school children follows a naturalist on a voyage of exploration through one of the most unusual museums in Canada.  On all sides the concrete dwellings of a modern city are held at bay by a low chain-link fence. 

   It's hard to believe that these 30 acres of tall-grass prairie, with over 100 different types of flowers growing in seeming disorder, can remain undisturbed in the midst of a busy metropolis.  But that's exactly what the Living Prairie Museum attempts to do.  For centuries the prairie has withstood all that Mother Nature could muster - drought, fire, extreme temperatures and grazing - why should the progress and political storms of modern day Winnipeg be any different? 

   The great St. James controversy of 1970, when preservationists were pitted against developers over the future of the 150 acres of prairie in the city's heartland, was one tempest the prairie endured and to which the Museum owes its very existence.  The spirit of the fight lives on, especially in Pete de Wet, an 87-year-old naturalist who angrily swung his cane at politicians during the controversy to such effect that the vote was tipped in favour of preserving the land. 

   In 1968, a Manitoba subcommittee of the International Biological Program recognized that the true or tall-grass prairie was in peril.  Once occupying one and a half million acres in the south-central region of the province, it now covered less than one per cent of its former range.  After great debate, the Museum was created in 1971 as a City of Winnipeg park.  Today, lack of funding and political will is again threatening the park's existence. 

   The Living Prairie Museum protects North America's largest and finest remnant of undisturbed tall-grass prairie.  Visited by 10,000 nature lovers, photographers, students, butterfly enthusiasts and birdwatchers every year, it offers educators the opportunity for study and provides visitors the chance to discover that prairie means more than flatlands and grain fields.  It's a complex ecosystem, shared by a variety of wildflowers, grasses, birds and animals that have adapted to survive their extreme environment. 

   From early spring until late fall, the Museum's small interpretive center functions as the starting point for visitors, who assume that the squat brown building is the main attraction.  But the Living Prairie Museum is not conventional by any standards.  "This is just the reception area," says Cheryl Neilsen, one of the Museum's naturalists. "The real museum is outside." 

   Surrounded by commercial and residential development, it's a tiny oasis of prairie grasses and wildflowers where no flower beds or artificial landscaping exists.  Here, as people wander the narrow grass paths, they are able to experience the uniqueness and diversity of a true prairie in much the same way the early settlers of the region did. 

   Their first impression will be of the native grasses that sweep the area, from the knee-high spear grass (Stipa spartea), to the elevated reaches of the big bluestem (Andropogon gerardi), which stretch shoulder high and beyond. 

   "The premier species of the tall-grass prairie is the big bluestem, which can reach six to eight feet (1.8 - 2.4 m) in more southerly prairies," says Neilson. "But the Museum contains 160 prairie plant species.  Some of them, such as rosinweed (Silphium integrifolium), compass plant (S. laciniatum) and prairie dock (S. terebinthinaceum) were reintroduced to the area during one of the Museum's restoration projects." 

   The tall-grass prairie boasts some of the hardiest members of the plant kingdom.  Their well-developed root systems, some reaching down more than 23 feet (7 m), enabled them to withstand the harsh realities of their environment, including yearly temperatures ranging from - 40C to + 40C, as well as sporadic and torrential rains and an ever-present wind. 

   "This is what makes prairie flowers so hardy and so different from other flowers," says J.H. Ball, a local environmentalist. "Even in very hot or dry periods you can always find three or four different species in bloom.  Usually more." 

   April, known as Crocus Days at the park, marks the beginning of a floral show that will continue until the first snowfall in October.  Most of the Museum's visitors arrive in the final cool weeks of the month to celebrate the coming of spring and the arrival of the prairie crocus (Anemone patens). 

   Unlike its English namesake, this crocus (also known as the Pasque flower and the blue tulip), is not grown from bulb but from seed.  When it's cloudy, it appears as a thumb-sized mauve flower bud pushing up through the snow.  When the sun is out, regardless of below-zero temperatures, it unfolds its six petals to reveal a brilliant yellow center. 

   Hugging the earth, the croci's furry stems and flowers are velvety to the touch, and their soft shiny petals are either pale purple, mauve, a very pale blue or white.  They reflect the sun towards the flower's bright center, which is several degrees warmer than the surrounding air, offering a haven to spring insects. 

   "You can explore the prairie with a guide or follow the self-guiding trail, but you'll probably find more if you just wander around alone," says Ball. "In May you'll see lots of prairie buttercups (Ranunculus rhomboideus), small in size but with a big, bright, buttery yellow colour." 

   June is called Wild Rose month at the Museum because of the abundance of low prairie roses (Rosa arkansana).  The entire landscape becomes a sea of pink, red and white, all swaying to the call of meadowlarks and finches.  Floating through the air is their delicate scent. 

   Often confused with the taller wood's rose (Rosa woodsii), and the prickly rose (Rosa acicularis), the low prairie rose rarely exceeds 12 inches (30 cm) in height.  It is considered an endangered species in Canada and is not easily grown from seed.  The successful gardener, however, will be rewarded with plentiful blooms and a harvest of tasty rose hips for teas, jams and jellies. 

   Not all of the Museum's resident flowers are like the showy roses.  Criss-crossing the site on a given day you are likely to encounter the delicate bird-foot violet (Viola pedatafida) snuggling down to avoid the ever-present wind.  Resembling a bird's foot, this blue violet is far hardier than many suspect and is able to survive fire as well as drought. 

   The large red-orange funnels of prairie lilies (Liliurn philadelphicum) are unmistakable.  Standing with their blooms just above the surrounding plants, they sometimes fall victim to the unscrupulous picker.  The tiny, pale amethyst-coloured trumpets of the lilac bearded tongue (Penstemon gracilis) don't seem to worry about pickers.  They raise their blossoms up high for all to see, but you have to bend over and look carefully to find them. 

   June is also the time of year when the heady smell of the wolfwillow, or silverberry (Elaeagnus commutata) flows across the landscape.  This shrub has yellow flowers that are so tiny they seem incapable of producing such a heavy, sweet fragrance, but you only have to follow your nose for proof of its origin. 

   July and August are very quiet at the Museum.  Temperatures of over 30C typify the prairie day in summer and keep away all but the hardiest of explorers.  But many still come, meandering happily, accompanied by the music of crickets and grasshoppers. 

   "You get a terrific array of colour during the hottest days.  And plants are a lot taller - usually about a meter high by August," says Ball, who walks the trails of the Museum once or twice a month. "You'll find purples and golds mainly.  White and purple prairie clovers (Petalostemon candidum and P. purpureum) dot the site, looking a lot like little cattails." 

   Meadow and dotted blazingstar (Liatris ligulistylis and L. punclata) appear as dirty, plum-coloured paint brushes.  A variety of sunflowers with their sulphur yellows and tarnished golds stretch just above their neighbours to take advantage of the wind and insects for pollination. 

   This is the time of year to find the blue-purple funnels and oblong leaves of the small, elusive and late-blooming gentian (Gentiana affinis), which grows only to a height of ten inches (25 cm).  With the rest of the prairie striving for the meter mark, it pays to ask the naturalist for direction to the newest blooms. 

   The chalky colours of sage (Artemisia ludoviciana), silver leaf psoralea (Psoralea argophylla) and wolfwillow give the prairie a hoary look in July, so much so that one area of the park is called Silver Heights.  By August some of the more somber tones of the late summer flowers stand out against the subtle silvers.  This is when you can find bergamot (Monarda fistulosa), used to make Earl Grey tea, in bloom.  The pink-purple fists of these flowers smell suspiciously of pizza, but the crushed stem will yield the familiar smell of the oil that flavours the tea. 

   While it may appear that there is little active management of the Museum, in the summer months three naturalists (only one is kept on over the winter) and assorted volunteers are regularly at work struggling to maintain the prairie given its location in the middle of the city. 

   People who come to the Museum in June are often shocked to see the staff running about with brooms and rubber flappers, setting fires and guiding their course.  Though it occasionally appears that a disaster is in progress, the opposite is true. 

   "We burn about one-fifth of the prairie every year, much to the annoyance of the surrounding home owners." says Neilsen. "It's an annual event, complete with leaping flames and huge clouds of smoke."  Not a bad day's work for the staff and helpers, but a little daunting for nearby residents, whose complaints and protests make managing the prairie a constant controversy. 

   But the prairie must burn if it's to remain healthy.  Fire is a natural part of prairie life; in fact, the plants have adapted to it and need it.  Burning encourages the growth of native species and inhibits succession by forest species, most notably the trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides).  It also allows seed to break dormancy and contributes to improving the nutrient level in the soil. 

   The entire 30-acre site is weeded by hand.  This back-breaking and tedious work is necessary to control the invading weed species that spring up in the small disturbed areas, where paths cut across the site or ground has been broken either by accident or past agricultural activity. 

   "On occasion they use some of the local law-breakers," says Ball. "They work off their fines by pulling weeds.  But most of the work is done by the staff."  The primary species designated as weeds in the prairie are Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), yellow sweet clover (Melilotus officinalis) and alfalfa (Medicago sativa). 

   A unique Canadian heritage, the Living Prairie Museum is a natural celebration of life and colour.  With nearly 200 native species of plants and fauna living alongside the monarch butterfly, western meadowlark, white-tailed jack rabbit and red fox, this museum provides a welcome contrast to the houses and highrises that encompass it.  Ensuring its survival into the next century will require the strength of spirit and deep commitment of Canadian naturalists everywhere. 

  An environmental biologist and past naturalist at the Living Prairie Museum, George R. Kynman works as a freelance environmental journalist in Manitoba.  </I

    NORTH OR NORTHWEST  
   Choosing the best houseplants for your exposure  
   By Amanda Jarrett  

   Summer can be deadly for houseplants.  With the sun high in the sky and the backyard beckoning, gardening and the other outdoor activities sometimes take precedence over their care.  But now is hardly the time to leave your houseplants to their own devices.  During these hot months most plants (some are dormant during the summer) need more water and food and probably less light as temperatures and light increase. 

   Some plants do well on the same windowsill year after year, but others need to be moved as the seasons change.  When fall becomes winter, light duration and intensity drop, but as the earth moves towards the sun in the spring light intensity and duration increase.  Many of your plants will respond to these changes; it's up to you to gage their response and attend to your plants accordingly. 

   Every day the sun rises in the east and sets in the west.  To select the appropriate houseplant for any one of your windows, it's important to know which direction they face.  The following is a description of the type of light to expect from each exposure and includes a list of the plants that will grow well there. 

   The north  

   There is no direct sun from a north-facing window, but the light is constant and cool.  Many foliage plants benefit from this light level.  </I

   Spring is sprung, the grass is riz...  
   I wonder where the birdies is?  

   Canadians are an odd and fortunate people.  Odd because we spend the better part of every year alternately steeling ourselves against the winter freeze and rushing out in a whirl of scarves and hats to embrace the pleasures of the frozen landscape. 

   Fortunate because every year spring follows winter with only slight irregularity.  Invariably, ever warmer breezes, melting snow and mud lead to new growth.  This renewal of life, however, is too often taken for granted, with little thought given to the consequences that even our most basic actions have on our natural surroundings.  As gardeners, we share the responsibility to contribute to the well-being of the environment by choosing to work our gardens in a healthy manner. 

   With the onslaught of green advertising from every sector of our consumer society, organic gardening methods are undergoing an identity crisis.  In this issue, we've decided to try and put a couple of methods in perspective.  Don Brenneman's report on fertilizers distinguishes between feeding your plants and feeding your soil, and in no uncertain terms lets you know which is better for your garden.  Ken Taylor provides fruit tree growers with a rundown of how and when to use dormant oil sprays to control pest problems. 

   Our feature article is bound to take some of the chill out of winter.  In Canada's Greenhouse, Gisele Grignon discovers that one way to satisfy a craving for the blossoms of summer is to explore the Governor General's greenhouse at Rideau Hall.  There's no pomp and circumstance here, just an 88-acre greenhouse and garden with a rich tradition and an even more vibrant collection of flowers. 

   Brave New Waves by Michael Spillane is full of what every gardener is looking for: sound advice on how to grow bigger and healthier plants.  The focus of the article is Sonic Bloom, a plant enhancer that uses sound frequency together with a nutrient spray to encourage extraordinary growth.  The treatment is available on cassette for home and commercial gardens.  Just imagine the possibilities when it comes out on CD. 

   If you've ever been attracted to the intense beauty and many guises of the begonia, you owe it to yourself to read Carol Sutton's Islands of Colour, because if you've grown one begonia, you certainly haven't grown them all.  Something else you may not have grown is the fava bean, a cool weather legume that has sustained the people of Rome, India and the Middle East for thousands of years.  In Stalking the Exotic Bean, Dan Jason explains why we should be growing the fava, and gives us a taste of how to do it. 

   Randall Prue's Native Delights cuts to the root of another would-be Middle Eastern vegetable, the Jerusalem artichoke.  We've also got an article brimming with tips on how to put together a user-friendly birdhouse.  If that's not enough to keep you busy until spring, keep reading.  There's lots more in the magazine.  We've even included a list of Canadian sources for seeds and catalogues, as well as a very important document: our readership survey.  Please read the magazine, then take a few minutes to fill in the survey.  We'd like to know who you are, what you enjoy, and what aspects of gardening in Canada you'd like to know more about. 

   Jane Pavanel  </I

    Keeping the bloom on some favourite gifts  
 
   LASTING IMPRESSIONS  

  Like harbingers of spring, a multitude of flowering plants become available at this time of year.  Many are popular a gifts, and all appeal to the plant lover looking for a splash of colour or a new plant to care for indoors.  The following six plants are given as gifts more often than any others.  Whether you're doing the buying or the receiving, it helps to know what to look for in the store and then how to care for your plant once it's safely home. 

   By Jean Harris  
  

    Cineraria   
   Resembling daisies, the cheery cineraria is a profuse bloomer whose flowers often completely cover the plant's foliage.  The flowers come in a wide range of both pastel and brilliant colours, in pinks, blues, purples and white, and will last up to three weeks. 

   Water your plant regularly; the mound of blossoms will wilt readily if the soil is allowed to dry out.  Cooler temperatures of 19 degrees C maximum and no direct sun will keep cinerarias happy, and remember not to fertilize while they are in bloom.  After flowering the leaves deteriorate rapidly.  Because cinerarias are annuals and cannot be reflowered, they are usually discarded after blooming.
 

   With patience, cinerarias can be grown from seed.  Sow by summer and gradually pot up the individual plants.  Flower bud initiation occurs during a three-to-four month period where night temperatures cannot exceed 16 degrees C.  If you want to hasten flowering, give your plant long hours of light.  Cinerarias and white flies seem to go together, so keep them isolated from your other plants. 

    Easter lily   

   Easter lilies are gift plants everyone loves; the traditional flower for Easter is the pure white lily, while hybrid lilies in reds, oranges and yellows are marketed for Mother's Day.  When buying, choose a plant with buds to make sure you will have a long flowering period.  Individual blooms will stay attractive for two or three weeks. 

   Place your plant in a bright, cool window and water only when the soil begins to dry.  Daytime temperatures of only 16 to 18 degrees C are preferred, and lilies will benefit by being moved to an even cooler spot at night.  It is believed that removing the yellow pollen-bearing anthers from the center of the flower will help the blooms last longer. 

   Cut off the flowers as they fade.  Lilies can't be brought into bloom again indoors as they have already been forced to flower before their natural season, which is summer.  Although lilies are perennial plants, they are unlikely to overwinter in most areas.  Try keeping them in a bright area until they can be safely planted into a sunny part of the garden where they may bloom again at summer's end without any special treatment. 

    Gardenia   

   For fragrance the gardenia is unsurpassed as an indoor bloomer.  The flowers, which may last up to three weeks, give off a heavy jasmine-like scent and their creamy-white colour contrasts beautifully with the glossy, dark green leaves of this woody plant. 

   Gardenias are so fussy about temperature that they disappoint many would-be growers.  During the day keep these sun lovers in maximum light at 21 to 23 degrees C and at night, 16 to 17 degrees C.  Warmer daytime temperatures will reduce the development of flower buds and will encourage buds to drop, and cooler temperatures during the night will cause leaves to yellow.  Any sudden change in temperature, exposure to drafts or lack of humidity will also cause the buds to drop. 

   To keep these plants healthy a very high humidity level, much higher than is normal in most homes, is essential.  Also, constant moisture and acid conditions are required.  Mist your plant daily or place it on a humidity tray, water as needed, then water monthly with an acid solution of ammonium sulphate (one level teaspoon to one liter of water. 

   Gardenias must be in constant growth to be able to bloom freely.  Feed routinely (every two or three weeks) during active growth but not during the winter months.  If you meet the temperature and humidity requirements of your plant, you will be rewarded with more flowers in the fall and then again in winter.  A stretch of cloudy weather may interrupt flowering. 

    Hydrangea   

   Hydrangeas can only be found around Easter and Mother's Day.  The large, round flower clusters in pastel pink or blue that form at the top of the plant's woody stems are long lasting, staying showy for one or two months.  Easy to keep, hydrangeas require average temperature and humidity and indirect, bright light.  Constant moisture is a must, however, or your plant will deteriorate rapidly.  Soil acidity is relatively neutral for pink blooms (pH 6.2 to 6.5) while blue hydrangeas develop in more acidic conditions (pH 4.5 to 5.0). 

   If you're keeping your plant to reflower next year, prune it back when the flowers have dried up to just above the old wood and water and fertilize monthly throughout the summer.  Buds will form when the plant is kept in a bright spot in temperatures of below 18 degrees C for six weeks.  Further development will occur over the next six weeks (equal to the winter dormancy period) if you keep your plant in continuous darkness at temperatures of 5 to 7 degrees C.  A cold but frost-free garage or cellar is suitable.  Hydrangeas can then be brought into bright light and forced into bloom if kept at 16 degrees C at night and 18 to 21 degrees C during the day for about three months. 

    Miniature orange   

   This citrus plant is everbearing, meaning that it flowers and sets fruit all year long.  Both the flowers, which are sweetly fragrant, and fruit, which can grow up to 2 inches (5 cm) in diameter, can be on the plant at the same time.  The juicy, acidic fruit is edible and can be used in beverages or when making jam as a substitute for lemons and limes. 

   These upright, compact, slow-growing trees demand full sun; without it the foliage will drop and the formation of blossoms will be retarded.  If sufficient light is not available, miniature oranges can be grown successfully under fluorescent lights.  Room temperatures and humidity should be average.  A humus-like, acidic soil that is kept moist but never saturated is best. 

   During periods of active growth be sure to supply a balanced all-purpose fertilizer.  Spending the summer outside will give them a lift.  If flowers fail to develop into fruit, pollinate them yourself using a child's paintbrush by lifting the yellow pollen from the stamens (the thread-like protrusions that are coated in pollen) of one blossom and brushing it on top of the pistil (the bulbous protruding part in the flower's center) of another.  Transplant to a slightly larger pot only when necessary, when the plant becomes pot bound and there is not enough soil to hold the water. 

    Miniature rose   

   Miniature roses, which come in the complete range of rose colours, are delightful for indoor plant culture.  You'll find the largest selection available just before Mother's Day.  Two of the most common are Rosa chinensis, which doesn't exceed one foot (30 cm) in height and bears single blooms that are half an inch to an inch (1 - 3 cm) across and leaves that are equally small, and the taller Rosa X polyantha, which produces one- to two-inch (3 - 5 cm) blooms in clusters.  While some miniatures have a fragrance, many others don't. 

   If provided with maximum light miniature roses will flower continuously.  If sufficient light can't be provided during the winter months, place your plant in a cool or unheated well-lit room to give it a rest period.  Miniatures are best suited to average to cool daytime temperatures and like a nighttime minimum of 10 to 13 degrees C.  The soil, which should be kept moist but not wet, should contain some humus and permit good drainage. 

   To encourage bushiness and more abundant winter blooming, put your plant outdoors for the summer and water and fertilize regularly.  Prune to a symmetrical shape in the fall and reduce watering until new growth appears.  Occasional pruning of the flowering stem will encourage new bud formation.  Side branches that don't bloom should also be pruned to prompt branching.  If your rose is well protected you can plant it permanently in the garden. 

  Jean Harris is an ornamental horticulturist and avid flower arranger.  She has been writing about plants for some 15 years.  <I

    BREATHTAKING BEAUTIES  
  Stapeliads may be fair of face, with stunning star-shaped flowers, but their smell can run afoul of your senses 
   By Robert E. Wrigley  
   , what died?  </I
<I
  It is a real privilege to be doing something you love so much,'she says.

   Dr. Anthony Burke, another member of University of Victoria's astronomy group, has in the past undertaken significant theoretical studies on the formation of stars and on the interstellar medium, which is the diffuse gas between stars.  Recently he has concentrated on teaching and administration.  He arrived at the university in 1968, has served on the Senate for most of the past ten years, and is the current chair of the Senate Honorary Degrees Committee.  

   Dr. Jeremy Tatum and Dave Balam, a research assistant who has been at University of Victoria for 14 years, work as a team to observe asteroids (which are referred to as minor planets), comets and other bodies in space.  The astronomers make measurements of the objects' positions and compute their orbits.  This aspect of the discipline is called astrometry, and Tatum says that Balam is 'one of the finest astrometrists that Canada has ever produced.' 

   Tatum and Balam form one of only about eighteen observing teams in the world, and there are even fewer orbital computing teams, Balam says.  Usually the two functions are performed by distinct groups, but the University of Victoria duo is diversified enough to do both. 

   Tatum and Balam have several tasks, one of the most significant of which is observing minor planets which have been provisionally numbered by the international Minor Planet Center.  Tatum and Balam calculate precision orbits so that the objects may be permanently numbered.  They also obtain precise positions of short period comets.  The most timely of their objectives is to provide rapid astrometry for newly-discovered comets and unusual asteroids in response to telegrams from the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams of the International Astronomical Union in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  They are often able to provide this information within a few hours of receiving a telegram. 

   'The main emphasis in the study of the solar system is on what things are, but first you have to know where they are,' Balam says.  'We find things so that others can study them.' 

   A central irony in the discipline is captured by Balam when he says, 'Over the years, I have seen only three of the things I have worked with: comet Halley and two others.'  While many astronomers are drawn to the field by their love of looking at the stars, like John Climenhaga, once they enter the field as professionals their major contact with stellar objects is by looking at photographic plates or CCD-generated images.  Even for people who are primarily observers, computations are much more a part of their daily astronomical routine than staring into space.  

   That romantic notion of astronomy is not lost completely, however.  Chris Spratt, who is a gardener with University of Victoria Buildings and Grounds, is one of the world's foremost amateur astronomers.  He carries his eight-inch Schmidt-Cassegrain telescope around with him, and 'can't pass by a clear night without looking at something.'  Most clear evenings Spratt, who lives in a condominium that does not afford good viewing, will drive to Cattle Point or a friend's house and observe for two to three hours.  He says that September through October and March through April are the best times of year for visual observations. 

   Spratt also works in conjunction with Balam and Tatum.  He receives the coordinates of a comet from them, then is able to locate it with his telescope.  He gathers information, especially on new comets, and enters it into a computer at home.  Spratt is able to measure the magnitude of a comet and to make visual observations about unusual activity in variable stars.  'In a way I feel like I'm helping the scientists,' he says.  'Also, for thousands of years humans revered the stars.  At one time, mankind was geared to the stars and was more attuned to nature.  I've had this interest since I was about nine,'spratt says, and he finally managed to get his own telescope when he was 15.  'My mother thought I was a bit off,' because of his interest in stars, he adds.  

   Spratt's success as an amateur astronomer should certainly have allayed any fears that he is 'a bit off.'  He has received the Chant Medal and the Ken Chilton Prize, both of which are awarded by the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, in recognition of his visual observations of comets, variable stars, asteroids, and eclipses.  He was named the top variable star observer in the world in 1976-77 and was second in 1980-81.  He has published numerous papers in The Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, The Journal of the American Association of Variable Star Observers, and Astronomy Magazine.  He has also written editorials for lay readers that have appeared in the Globe and Mail. 

   Tatum says of the astronomers at University of Victoria, 'We tend to be pretty much individual scientists doing what we want to do and being successful at it.'  Students who have come through the University of Victoria astronomy program are beginning to make their mark in the world of astronomy as well.  Tatum says that in his reading of the literature in the field, he has begun to see a number of University of Victoria astronomy graduates publishing important papers.  'They are becoming good astronomers in their own right,' he says. 

   Staff of the Climenhaga Observatory are also making University of Victoria's program accessible to younger students.  Lab instructor Russ Robb is an eager and enthusiastic tour guide for high school students and others who choose to view the dome as part of a campus tour.  He demonstrates the power of the sun's heat by placing a pencil under the ray reflected by a small telescope on the Elliot Building roof.  The pencil immediately beings to smoke and is on the verge of bursting into flames when he pulls it out of the ray.  He then shows guests the inside of the dome and explains the operation of the main telescope; if Venus or some other body is visible on the day of the tour, he will focus the telescope on it to give the guests an extra treat. 

   Humans have always been fascinated by the sky and what lies beyond our world.  Astronomers at University of Victoria have become international leaders in the quest to know and understand the origins, history, and secrets of the universe. 

 </I

 <I
   If flowering plants become leggy and pale, refuse to flower and lean towards a light source, move them to an east window where they will get more light.  Plants in a north window in the summer may have to be moved to a brighter location in the winter. 

  The east 
   Many plants benefit from the cool morning sun that radiates through an east-facing window.  Eaves and overhangs lessen the duration of direct sun from this exposure.  If you are unsure about a plant's light requirements, an east window is a safe bet.  It receives up to four hours of sun per day, which many flowering plants appreciate. 

  The south 
   The seasonal variation in light from the south is greater than any other exposure.  In the summer, bright, direct light fills the room and is at its most intense at midday.  Tropical flowering plants, cacti and succulents do well in this window. 

  The west 
   Even though the sun is not at its highest in this window, it is at its hottest for four hours in the afternoon.  Cacti, succulents and some tropical foliage plants do well here.  West-facing windows are not always hot because elevation and latitude play an important role in light intensity, which is higher in the mountains, where the air is thinner, than at sea level. 


   Many tropical flowering plants do well with a western exposure during the summer.  If possible, cacti and succulents should be moved to a window that faces south in the winter.  

  Hanging plants 
   Many hanging plants may suffer from too little light even when placed in a bright, sunny window.  When ceilings are high and windows are low the plant dangles above the light.  To rectify this, attach brackets to the wall beside the window and hang the plant there, tie a rope to the hanger to lengthen it or select plants that need less light. 

  Skylights 
   Many people have skylights in their homes, which add extra light for plants to grow.  How big the skylight is and how far it is from the ceiling of the room to the top of the skylight determines the type of plant that should be placed there. 

   Some openings are over six feet (2 m) from the ceiling to the roof of the house, which allows for limited light.  To grow plants up the shaft is an appealing idea but it's hard to maintain the plants.  Note the hours of direct sun and the intensity of light the skylight receives and select plants accordingly. 

 </I

 <I
   But Ronald Worton, geneticist-in-chief at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, said that, until recently, various organizations that fund Canadian scientific studies, including the National Research Council, the Medical Research Council (MRC) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), have as yet been unable to agree on which agency should provide the money, or where the money will come from.  One problem is that agencies want specific research proposals, which scientists say they need money to provide.  Said Worton: 'It's a fairly complex undertaking that can't be presented as a regular research proposal, or funded from the existing pot.  So nobody is quite sure where to start.' 

   The global project that Canadian scientists want to join is aimed at producing, by the early 21st century, a complete so-called map, actually a huge chart, showing the exact molecular sequence of about 100,000 genes, the genetic code-carrying units that are embedded in the deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, that makes up the core of human cells.  Each gene contains part of the overall genetic blueprint that determines the physical makeup of all forms of life.  The information is encoded in combinations of four chemical 'bases,' as scientists call them - adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine.  Each piece of genetic information directs cells to produce proteins that determine everything from the height of a man and the color of his hair, to the shape of a woman's foot and her tendency to develop certain illnesses.  In all  , a total of three billion DNA bases are involved in determining human characteristics. 

   The project that involves charting each of the bases and the genes they make up, so that doctors will some day know exactly which gene is responsible for every function of the human body, is the first comprehensive project to embrace the science of molecular biology.  The brainchild of Robert Sinsheimer, then chancellor of the University of California at Santa Cruz, the idea attracted the attention in 1986 of James Watson, the American biologist who, with British biologist Francis Crick, discovered the molecular structure of the DNA molecule in 1953.  In 1988, the Bethesda, Md.-based U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) established an office of human genome research, led by Watson, to co-ordinate American efforts to map the genome. 

   Despite the delay in establishing a Canadian contribution to the project, Canada is a highly regarded participant in genetic research.  Last August, doctors at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children located the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis, a fatal disorder that affects one in every 2,000 children and causes excess mucus to clog the lungs and digestive system.  The team leader was Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui, who says a complete genome map would have allowed the discovery to take place three years earlier.  'Right now, scientists have to start locating genes again with each new project,' he said.  Tsui and other supporters say the proposed computerized map would eliminate that need, increasing scientific efficiency and enabling small labs to work in complex genetics. 

   The same hospital's Worton is a member of the executive of the Human Genome Organization, a Geneva-based group of about 250 scientists from two dozen countries that was set up last year to promote international collaboration in the genome effort.  Said Worton: 'Canada is a world leader, so people will naturally ask why we're dragging our feet on a project that will have huge payoffs for the public and industry.'  Last October, Worton helped to write a general proposal for Canadian genome research, which called for grants from Ottawa of between $25 million and $50 million during the next five years. 

 </I




   DOCTORING  
  Tinkering with the stuff of life, scientists are on the edge of engineering cures for the deadliest diseases of our time 
  Article by MARK WITTEN

   AT 8 O'CLOCK ON THE MORNING OF June 5, 1992, DENISE ROCHEAU, A 28-YEAR-OLD QUEBEC CITY woman, was wheeled into an operating room at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.  A heavy black mask was placed over her nose and mouth, and taking direction, she began inhaling deep drafts of an anaesthetic.  Waiting for the patient to lose consciousness, a team of about a dozen medical experts, briefed to the final detail, made a last inspection of the high-tech apparatus scattered around the room.  Off to the side, the team's leader, Jim Wilson, a tall, boyish-looking doctor, watched intently. 

   A mother who worked as a seam-stress and part-time bank teller, Denise (a pseudonym to conceal her identity) suffered from a deadly inherited heart disorder called familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH).  FH is caused by the lack of an essential gene in the liver that helps remove "bad" cholesterol - the type that sticks to artery walls and clogs blood vessels - from the bloodstream.  The disease had already killed two of her brothers and had been responsible for her heart attack at the age of 16.  Either with great faith or in great desperation, Denise agreed to be a human guinea pig in a medical fantasy now being brought to life by gene therapist Jim Wilson.  She was gambling that Wilson and his team could safely treat the disease by replacing her fatally flawed genes with new ones.  Failure could cost Denise her life.  Success would usher in a revolution in modern medicine more sweeping than the discovery of vaccines or antibiotics. 

   With clinical precision, lead surgeon Steve Raper dragged his scalpel across Denise's skin just below the rib cage, producing a crimson streak.  Raper then cut through layers of abdominal tissue until he reached his target, Denise's liver.  He paused, probed for a lobe of the vital organ, and cut away a 255-gram section while the assisting surgeon hastened to stop the bleeding.  To the naked eye, there was nothing to suggest that this hand-sized slab of pinkish brown tissue harboured a fatal genetic defect that caused Denise to have cholesterol levels three times greater than normal.  The severed lobe hung from a pair of forceps and then dropped into a plastic bag that rested in a basin filled with ice.  Wilson grabbed the container, tucked it under his arm like a football, and rushed to a laboratory where his colleague, Mariann Grossman, was ready to begin the exacting process of inserting healthy genes into the patient's liver. 

   It would take four intense days of activity in the medical centre's laboratories, operating room, and intensive-care unit before the gene-therapy procedure was completed, and several months more before Wilson was certain that the new genes were bringing about a lasting improvement in Denise's cholesterol levels.  Early this spring, nearly two years after the operation, Wilson, Grossman, and their gene-therapy team made medical history when they published the results of the experiment in the scientific journal Nature Genetics.  Their landmark report, which made front-page headlines around the world, was the first to show the lasting therapeutic benefits of gene therapy for a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease. 

   Wilson was able to report that Denise's harmful-cholesterol levels had dropped by almost 20 percent after gene therapy and that the level of "good" cholesterol was raised significantly.  She was administered a cholesterol-lowering drug, which had not worked prior to the treatment, and her harmful cholesterol dropped by about 30 percent overall from pre-treatment levels, although it still remained at more than twice normal levels.  The most encouraging news, however, was that her cholesterol had remained low for the full 28 months since she had received the treatment.  Since Denise's operation, four other FH patients have undergone Wilson's experimental gene therapy: a 12-year-old boy from Cyprus, an 8-year-old girl from Colombia, an 11-year-old girl from China, and a 41-year-old woman from Quebec.  The results of these treatments should be known by the end of 1994. 

   "We've demonstrated the long-term safety and effectiveness of gene therapy in this patient," says Wilson. "By doing so, we have opened the doors for the potential of gene therapy in treating various forms of inherited lethal disorders.  I believe that gene therapy will become a part of every medical discipline." 

   At 39, Jim Wilson is in the vanguard of a generation of scientists whose ability to manipulate and reconstruct DNA in the laboratory gives them the power to alter the genetic makeup of people.  In biological terms, gene therapy uses DNA information technology to re-program human cells in the hope of correcting critical genetic-coding errors.  A few years ago, the idea of using gene therapy to treat patients with life-threatening diseases was an exciting but only theoretical possibility.  Today, gene therapy is one of the hottest areas of medical research.  More than 70 clinical trials are under way in the United States, Great Britain, Italy, and China, and a number of tests are being planned across Canada.  Trials include Wilson's treatment of five FH patients and a second major test in which he plans to treat 22 patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common genetic disease among Caucasians. 

   Gene therapy excites medical researchers because, in theory, it offers a way to treat the root cause of any inherited disease, including many fatal illnesses for which there is currently no effective treatment or cure.  Instead of treating the symptoms that result from a genetic defect, gene therapy seeks to correct the problem at the source and, in this way, provide a lasting cure.  Gene therapy offers new hope in the seemingly one-sided battle against some 4,000 inherited diseases that are known to result from a defective single gene.  The better-known ones include muscular dystrophy, CF, sickle-cell anaemia, Tay-Sachs disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). 

   The potential applications of gene therapy go far beyond single-gene disorders.  Genetic defects are also known or suspected to play a role in society's most common and deadliest diseases, including many types of cancer, Alzheimer's disease, haemophilia, and diabetes.  In many instances, the underlying genetic basis of the illness is not yet understood and may involve a complex interaction of several genes.  As the processes become known, researchers hope that gene therapy will help correct the conditions. 

   But for all its huge promise, human gene therapy has been thin on hard clinical data to show that it works.  Scientists such as 57-year-old French Anderson, who led the first government-approved human gene-therapy trial four years ago, have been theorizing about it since the late 1960s.  That's when Anderson sent an article on the subject to The New England Journal of Medicine, where it was rejected after a heated debate. 

   Why did it take 25 years before Jim Wilson could successfully apply the concept of gene therapy for the first time?  In theory, the idea is simple: Just insert a healthy gene to do the work of a defective gene.  In reality, gene therapy is anything but simple.  First, scientists must find and clone the right gene among a hundred thousand others packed into the DNA in each human cell.  Second, they must be able to deliver the right genes safely into the right target cells, in either the bloodstream, liver, lung, or brain.  Then they must get the transplanted genes to work properly in order to correct the biochemical breakdown that causes the disease. 

   Finding a gene is enormously difficult.  As the basic units of heredity, genes are segments of DNA in the nucleus of each cell that contain instructions to make proteins, the basic building blocks of life.  The famous DNA double helix is a winding molecular ladder three billion rungs long.  A specific gene can be a segment of DNA that is as short as a thousand rungs or as long as several hundred thousand rungs.  Gene hunter Francis Collins likes to observe that locating a gene is much harder than finding a needle in a haystack.  The needle stands out because it looks different, but a gene is just another piece of DNA. 

   Until the 1980s, only a few of the genes that cause single-gene disorders had been cloned.  These included the adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene that causes severe combined immune deficiency (SCID); the gene that causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a rare degenerative disease of the nervous system; and the beta globin gene that causes thalassaemia, a deadly blood disorder common among Mediterranean peoples. 

   At first, each of these diseases was considered a potential candidate for human gene therapy.  The idea was so tantalizing that Martin Cline, a brilliant and ambitious California scientist, conducted a rogue experimental gene-therapy trial in the summer of 1980.  Cline, who had been denied permission to conduct human trials in the United States, secretly flew to Israel and Italy, where he inserted beta globin genes into two young women afflicted with thalassaemia.  As it turned out, Cline had also misled the Israeli ethics-review committee about the methods he was using.  The research superstar lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in grants after U.S. funding authorities found out about the tests. 

   The Cline fiasco highlighted both the severe technical limitations of gene therapy at the time and the need for a new government regulatory body to review the technical and ethical merits of any proposed human gene-therapy trials in the future. In 1980, scientists had not cloned many genes, nor had they developed effective methods for transferring genes into human cells and getting those genes to work.  The technical hurdles were so great that in 1981, French Anderson, one of gene therapy's strongest proponents, abandoned research for several years.  With Anderson temporarily out of the field, Richard Mulligan, a young researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Boston, filled the void.   He showed that specialized retroviruses could perform the critical job of delivering genes into animal and then human cells and getting the genes to work.  The retroviruses, really bundles of genes and proteins, act like molecular delivery vans that attach to a target cell and then insert the healthy gene that they carry into the DNA of the host cell.  In Mulligan's laboratory, genetically engineered mouse leukemia retroviruses successfully delivered human genes into mouse DNA.  The finding electrified the still young gene-therapy field. 

   In the fall of 1990, French Anderson, Michael Blaese, and Kenneth Culver at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland, performed the first human gene-therapy trial when they treated two girls with SCID.  The girls were born with a mutant chromosone that kept them from producing the ADA enzyme.  Without the enzyme, the body cannot produce new T-cells (a type of white blood cell) to fight disease, leaving the children defenceless against infection.  In a widely publicized experiment, the NIH team used genetically engineered retroviruses to put normal ADA genes into the girls' deficient T-cells.  The hope was that the children's new T-cells would begin making enough ADA to boost their immune systems.  Four years after the initial treatments, the first gene-therapy trial remains controversial because no scientific paper has been published showing the trial's results. 

   Scientists were just learning how to manipulate genes when Wilson entered the University of Michigan's M.D./Ph.D. program in 1978, but it was an area that fascinated him.  As part of his research with geneticist Bill Kelley, Wilson helped discover the genetic flaw that causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a devastating inherited disease that leads to mental retardation and compulsive self-mutilation in boys.  Wilson vividly recalls how excited and happy he was when he told families whose children had Lesch-Nyhan about his discovery of the mutant gene, only to be greeted with disappointment from one mother: "She didn't respond.  Then she asked me, "How will this help my kids?" "  All Wilson could say was, "It won't."  To treat Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, gene therapists must overcome the huge obstacle of effectively delivering genes into brain cells.  The incident brought home to Wilson very early in his career the huge gap between finding and fixing a gene. 

   During the 1980s, Wilson eagerly followed the viral-engineering break-throughs of Richard Mulligan.  </I
   Last Call?  
  The cry of the loon is a symbol of the Canadian wilderness.  The less we hear it, the more it tells us about the declining state of our mutual home. 
  Essay by JEFF FAIRCHK - there' another name at the end...

   AT NOON ON A DAY IN LATE May, I drive my little skiff into the northernmost bay of Aziscohos Lake, a hydroelectric reservoir not far from the Quebec border in western Maine.  Right on schedule: I have spent half the day wandering along the western shoreline, spying on loon pairs and recording evidence of nesting, and will spend the remainder floating leisurely back down the east side with an eye out for my charges.  Someone has to do it, and I happen to like the work. 

   For 11 years, I was employed by the Audubon Society of New Hampshire as chief biologist and philosopher of its loon-recovery project.  Now I work directly for the loons and am paid for my efforts largely by power companies, which are inspired by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in Washington, D.C., to worry about how water-level changes on their impounded lakes affect the resident loons and their reproductive success.  Consultant seems too formal, too brassy a title.  Call me an independent biologist. 
 
   This large bay is the territory belonging to and protected by a pair of loons that I've known for eight years as the Little Magalloway Pair.  They are fishing out in the middle when I arrive.  I motor off to a far corner with a view of the entire territory, sun at my back, and shut off the outboard.  Through binoculars, I watch them diving.  They alternate, each dive lasting less than a minute.  I suspect that eventually one of them will move toward their nest.  Ten minutes into the program, as if by coincidence, the two dive together.  A full minute passes.  Two, three, Five.  Under these conditions - lightly overcast sky, calm water the colour of wet concrete - a child could spot the black periscope-like head of a loon from a kilometre away. 

   I see nothing.  I pour a cup of coffee from my thermos, eat my sandwich.  Still nothing.  I pour more coffee, finish lunch, all the while watching.  Half an hour later, I still have not seen them.  The loons have disappeared. 

   Pretty crafty.  But not surprising.  Much of our attraction to the loon, after all, derives from its clandestine behaviours.  Nothing like a taste of the unknown, the mysterious, to haunt the human mind with intrigue and inspire it toward romance.  However, there is a dark side to our romance with the loon.  These days, many of us feel a powerful and unrequited longing for this wild spirit on lakes from which it has disappeared completely, chased off by human meddling or poisoned out by toxins we have dealt upon the landscape.  But this loss only inspires a greater affection: across Canada, a large network of vigilantes now monitors and fosters the loon's survival.  Why such a spirited effort? 

   "Canadians have a historical gravitation toward loons," a paddler in the outback of Ontario once explained to me. "Our national expansion was along waterways, by canoe.  We identify with the call of the loon." 

  

   And exactly what is it about the call of the loon, I asked.  "There's a certain piercing, haunting quality that tells you there is still life out there," he said.  "Wild life."  Then he paused. "Sometimes there's something ... almost human to it." 

   The loon I refer to here is the common loon, Gavia immer, provincial bird of Ontario, or huart a collier ( "cry in a necklace" ) to French Canadians.  Three to seven kilograms of gristle, dance, fish oil, feather, web, wail, and deception.  Not to be confused with the little red-throated loon of ponds along the subarctic coast and on the tundra, the Pacific loon of larger, deeper lakes of northern Canada west of Hudson Bay, or the yellow-billed loon of the far north. 

   The common loon nests on lakes and ponds throughout the boreal forest across North America.  In Canada, its heartland, it numbers between a quarter- and a half-million birds.  Its beauty is one more part of its allure.  Sexes are similar, their backs and sides spangled white on a field of black and otherwise adorned with two necklaces of legendary origin, one black dagger of a beak, glowing white breast, and eyes redder than rubies set in a black head, sleek as satin, known by aficionados to reflect dark iridescent green when seen up close under a particular angle of sunlight.  Every part has its purpose - even the gaudy chessboard back serves as camouflage on sun-dappled water or on the nest under the stippled shadows of willow or blueberry. 

   The ecologist's eye discerns yet a different kind of beauty, that of a superbly designed organism engineered, in this case, to catch fish.  The graceful shape allows torpedolike speed under water, powered by two huge feet set as far aft as possible for optimal leverage.   The loon's bones are solid and heavy; by flattening its feathers to remove interstitial air, a loon can make itself heavier than water and sink vertically.  Though their pulmonary air capacity may last only a few minutes, loons have been captured in fish traps 60 metres down. 

   The loon pays in trade-offs for these specialties.  Because its feet are set so far back on its heavy body, it moves awkwardly on land.  It builds its nest at the Water's edge, therefore, and can gain flight only from a liquid runway.  A frightened loon will not fly, it will dive. 

   And to good avail: a loon can slip beneath the surface of a large, quiet lake on a clear day and disappear forever.  How does it do it?  At some indeterminable distance and direction, the escaping loon raises just its bill above the surface, grabs a quick breath, and resubmerges, leaving not a ripple.  I saw it once, by luck, through my cheap Sears 7 x 35 extrawide-angle field glasses.  A series of these fast-snorkeled breaths allows a loon to put kilometres between itself and the dumbfounded human observer. 

   More alluring than its physical beauty is the cry of the loon, lorn and lonely, reaching you as you stand on shore under a wine-coloured sky, feeling much the same.  A single wail at first.  Then another, followed by yet others, excitement growing, blending into a chorus of laughter and shrieking until the night is redundant with ancient emotion. 

   Acoustic biologists have identified four distinctly meaningful calls: the hoot (a quiet contact call uttered among individuals close together), the wail ("Where are you? ... Come here"), the tremolo (a quavering cry signifying alarm), and the yodel (most radically insane of all, given by males to establish territory or express extreme alarm, as when a chick is threatened). 

   In native legends across Canada, the loon's calls forewarned of storms or presaged the resurrection of a human soul.  They were calls between lovers, for the return of a companion, of joy at being awarded those lovely necklaces in return for restoring sight to a blind human.  Ojibwa warriors heard promise of victory.  Cree heard the voices of their dead.  Our cold-hearted behavioural scientists postulate that the wild nighttime choruses are a function of territorial behaviour.  Perhaps so.  But why not consider deeper emotions?  Joy?  Celebration?  Camaraderie? 

   Through the season, I drop in on the Little Magalloway Pair, watching for the sequence of behaviours typical of nesting loons.  Shortly after ice-out, the male arrives to establish the territory with song and dance.  Then the female comes, and the two remain on the lake, often close together, after the migrants pass through.  In late May or early June, you begin to notice only one bird at a time.  If you are lucky, you may hear a solitary wail and see a second bird arrive just before the first disappears to take its shift at incubation. 

   But I do not see this sequence with the Little Magalloway Pair.  Instead, I observe two birds - when I see them at all - out on the water together.  No hint of incubation.   No nest, no eggs at any of their traditional nesting sites.  I've seen it before.  Even the most productive pairs take a year off from family responsibilities once in a while, primarily to aggravate the local loon biologist. 

   In early September, I am showing off my study area to a loon biologist from Alaska, attempting to appear proficient at my trade.  When we reach the Little Magalloway territory, I explain that this pair has failed to nest this year.  "That's odd," says my companion, peering through her binoculars.  "They have a chick with them."  I take a look.  They've lied to me again. 

   This was all two years ago, and I never did find the nest.  Not that I needed to.  As my Alaskan friend pointed out, a chick is a fairly strong indication that an egg had been laid.  Nor did I mind the subterfuge.  I had studied loons for only 16 years at the time.  Had a lot to learn.  Still do.  No one knows, for example, which loons occupy which portions of their broad winter range, whether young adults return to their natal areas, why some lakes that offer apparently good loon habitat remain vacant, or how many chicks a loon pair must raise in a lifetime in order to balance attrition.  For decades, we believed that loon pairs fiercely maintained fidelity toward both mate and territory.  Then a young biologist, Dave Evers, working out of Whitefish Point Bird Observatory on Lake Superior, fashioned a technique for catching loons to colour-band them so that individuals could be recognized.  Early results indicate that at least one-fifth of his banded birds switch mates or sneak onto other territories each year.  One wonders what else remains veiled in the loon's mystique. 

   The common loon may live to be 25 or 30 years old.  Typical of long-lived birds, the loon lays a small clutch - nearly always two eggs - and gives its young full care through the summer.  Both mates participate in everything but egg laying.  A loon may ride the young on its back or disappear with them after hatching.  But the mystical nature of this creature does not always work in its favour.  Loons will dance and sing in the summer twilight, year after year, informing the night and our dreams with their presence while never revealing a chronic failure in reproduction.  Until one spring, in their absence, there reigns an empty and terrible silence. 

   Is it possible that the common loon, this stable creature with 60 million years of evolutionary fine-tuning, signature voice and spirit of Canada's wilds, symbol of this vast and haunting land that the entire continent once thought was inviolable, is disappearing from its haunts? 

   By 1981, the southern Ontario country once described as "a vast uninhabited solitude" by 19th-century naturalist Charles Fathergill had suffered enough human habits and habitation to turn away its native loon population.  This prompted the Long Point Bird Observatory in Port Rowan to form its Ontario Lakes Loon Survey, later to become the nationwide Canadian Lakes Loon Survey, now under the direction of biologist Harry Vogel and empowered by 3,500 volunteers from Nova Scotia to the Yukon.  The survey records the presence and breeding success of loons from volunteers' reports and provides information to the public.  I asked Vogel about the status of the loon in Ontario.  The southern edge of its breeding range is still receding, he told me.  Why?  Well, he said, human behavior. 

   Not the mere presence of humans but the behaviour of our modern monoculture - the incredible busy-ness we inflict upon our public waters.  Not only is loon habitat lost to shoreline development, but nesting sites are disturbed - by berry pickers, picnickers, part-time naturalists, canoeists and rowboaters, clandestine lovers, anglers, and campers - frequently enough to frighten the loons off their clutch of eggs and dissuade them from returning.  Similar human blunders separate adult loons from their chicks, leaving the little ones susceptible to predation or eventual starvation. 

   Dieter Schoenfeld is a charter volunteer member of the Loon Survey who with his wife, Marlies, monitors loon populations and reproduction on 10 lakes in the Sudbury area, including McFarlane, on which they live.  </I
  A DISCOURAGING WORD: Diseased bison trigger a stormy debate 

   Almost 60 million of the majestic animals once roamed the forests and flatlands of North America.  But European settlers brought a brutal end to that era when they killed off nearly all of the continent's bison.  By 1885, fewer than 1,000 remained.  Now, the world's largest free-ranging herd consists of an estimated 4,000 bison (the animals are widely, but erroneously, referred to as buffalo) that live under federal protection in northern Alberta.  But until last week, when federal cabinet ministers intervened with a promise to look for alternatives, the bison seemed destined for mass slaughter.  The drastic measure was proposed by a federally appointed panel that said that many of the bison are dangerously diseased. 

   The recommendation to systematically exterminate the entire herd in Wood Buffalo National Park created a storm of controversy over Canadian wildlife policy.  If, as the Aug. 29 federal report said, at least half of the bison are carrying tuberculosis or brucellosis (a disease that causes pregnant bison to abort), they might infect other wild bison.  Also at risk are domestic cattle, which come into contact with bison that often wander outside the park.  Brucellosis spreads when animals graze in pastures contaminated by the afterbirth of ailing female bison.  Tuberculosis can spread to other animals by airborne contact or through tainted water.  Agriculture officials said that the epidemic could arouse U.S. suspicions about Canadian beef, forcing Ottawa to spend millions of dollars on inspection tests. 

   As a result, some federal officials say that the bison should be slaughtered.  But the proposal led to widespread protests by naturalists and native groups, who claimed that there was not sufficient proof of widespread illness among the animals.  As the controversy deepened, Environment Minister Robert de Cotret came to the animals' rescue.  "I don't think the solution is to go out and shoot," said de Cotret after meeting with native groups in Edmonton.  "What we want is a healthy herd, and there are other ways to get that." 

   Still, some wildlife experts contend that extermination is the best way to prevent the contamination of other herds.  The scientists say that tuberculosis and brucellosis are difficult to detect, and can lie dormant for years.  They also claim that rampant disease (according to some estimates, as many as 80 per cent of the bison are infected) has helped to reduce the herd to fewer than 4,000 from more than 12,000 a few decades ago.  Said Stacy Tessaro, a veterinary research scientist with Agriculture Canada in Saskatoon: "It comes down to emotion versus scientific assessments.  Nobody wants to destroy an animal, but we have no vaccine and no way to cure it." 

   To bolster their arguments, agriculture experts point to a similar epidemic of tuberculosis among water buffalo in northern Australia.  Officials had 7,000 infected animals killed in about 146 square miles of dense jungle between 1983 and 1985.  "Complete depopulation was cheaper and a lot less painful to the animals," said William Bulmer, the Ottawa-based director of animal health for Agriculture Canada.  "Thorough management will solve the problem, whereas inaction could mean the extinction of wood buffalo." 

   For their part, defenders of the bison say that no one really knows how many animals are infected by disease.  Opponents of the proposed slaughter include some Alberta-based employees at Parks Canada who, late last month, released an unofficial memo that condemned the findings of the environmental assessment review panel.  In their memo, the employees said that the allegations of widespread disease may be unfounded because the most recent thorough study of the herd took place in 1975.  As well, the memo's authors claimed that the proposed slaughter put the interests of cattle farmers above the integrity of Canada's national parks.  But agriculture experts say that the risk of contamination to cattle could prove more costly in the long run.  Officials declared Canada's 14 million cattle free of brucellosis in 1985 and expect them to be rid of tuberculosis by next year, creating greater export opportunities in the United States and fewer inspection requirements.  Federal officials say that Ottawa's $500-million fight to eradicate both diseases in cattle may now be in jeopardy because of the Wood Buffalo herd.  Said John Kellar, Ottawa-based associate director of disease control at Agriculture Canada: "We might risk our reputation for safe beef exports.  Slaughter seems drastic, but it's the only way to solve this." 

   Meanwhile, Agriculture Minister Donald Mazankowski supported de Cotret in opposing the proposed mass slaughter. Mazankowski said that he plans to seek cabinet support for a quarantine and partial slaughter of the animals instead.  That approach drew support from some naturalists and wildlife experts who say that mass slaughter would be a destructive solution to an exaggerated problem.  Said Lindsay Wasylyshyn, vice-president of the Metis Association in Fort Smith, N.W.T., just across the Alberta border from Wood Buffalo Park: "Those buffalo are part of a food chain that extends from the wolves on down to the bugs.  Destroy them and you destroy the whole ecosystem."  But, without a cure or vaccine on the horizon, many of the park's bison may still be facing a death sentence.  </I

   A battle for control: Islanders take on the mighty Irving empire 

   During the 1860s, violent riots broke out on Prince Edward Island as tenant farmers tried to gain ownership from absentee British landlords who controlled the island's farmland.  The farmers eventually succeeded.  But now, Island farmers are up in arms again over what they claim is an attempt by a single, powerful family to gain control over a large block of P.E.I. farmland.  The dispute places Premier Joseph Ghiz, who is also the province's justice minister, in opposition to billionaire industrialist K. C. Irving and one of his granddaughters.  In April, Ghiz wrote to Mary Jean Irving, telling her and her husband, Stewart Dockendorff, that he had reason to believe they had acquired more land than the province permitted and ordered them to divest themselves of some of it.  If Irving is charged and found guilty of contravening the Lands Protection Act, she could face a fine of $5,000 or up to six months in jail. 

   Ghiz is placing the resources of his tiny island against the mighty Saint John, N.B.-based Irving industrial empire, with an estimated $10 billion in assets in 1989.  Irving interests now own or control nearly 25,000 acres of P.E.I. cropland - about six per cent of the provincial total.  Said Daniel Hendricken, who farms 125 acres of land near Fanningbrook, 35 km east of Charlottetown: "Island farmers fought hard to get control of their land.  Now, we're losing it again." 

   Since 1971, the Irving family plant at Cavendish Farms at New Annan, 62 km southwest of Charlottetown, has processed potatoes grown on 3,000 acres of their land and another 17,000 acres leased or controlled by them.  In April, Conservative opposition leader Leone Bagnall declared that Mary Jean Irving and her husband had purchased 4,800 additional acres of farmland individually and on behalf of Indian River Farms Ltd., the corporation they control. (Under Island law at the time, corporations could own a maximum of 3,000 acres; individuals could own 1,000 acres each.)  Bagnall's revelation led 135 Island farmers to stage a protest march in Charlottetown on April 23.  Said James Rodd, a regional co-ordinator for the National Farmers Union: "We don't want to go back to the time on P.E.I. when we were tenants." 

   Pressed to take action, Ghiz's Liberal government rushed a bill through the legislature limiting future corporate acquisitions to five acres.  For her part, Mary Jean Irving, who has until July 22 to reply to Ghiz's letter, insists that there is no connection between her grandfather's empire and the land she and her husband own.  Meanwhile, the dispute may have contributed to a slowdown in Irving investments.  Some Islanders say that a planned expansion of Cavendish Farms was put on hold after Ghiz's government began taking on the mighty Irving empire.  </I

   MYSTERY IN THE FIELDS: Experts study bizarre marks on the ground 

   Jennifer Skinner says that only aliens could have caused what happened in her wheat field outside of Lethbridge, Alta.  Skinner's son-in-law, Cyril Hubbard, was the first member of the family to spot the strange occurrence: on Sept. 1, while harvesting in a field, he noticed two 15-foot-wide circles connected by paths to a 20-foot-wide circle.  "I don't like it," said Skinner after viewing the site.  quote "There's no tracks, nothing.  This has been done from the air somehow.  It makes me nervous."  Skinner's is one of at least six mysterious "crop circle sites" that have appeared in southern Alberta fields since Aug. 21.  Circles of flattened grain have been reported in hundreds of locations across North America, Britain and Australia.  Researchers are baffled by the phenomenon.  Says Herman Austenson, a professor of crop sciences at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon who studied a site near North Battleford, Sask.: "I can tell you one thing - it absolutely is not a hoax.  But what caused it, I don't know." 

   In Canada, the first crop circles were reported in Langenburg, Sask., in 1974.  In the past two years, about 20 more circles have been found in Saskatchewan and Alberta, and more have been reported across the western United States.  The largest concentration of circles is in England.  According to Ralph Noyes, secretary of the 800-member, year-old Centre for Crop Circle Studies in London, scientists have documented more than 1,000 so-called circle events in Britain.  About half of those have occurred in a 20-square-mile corner of the southern English county of Wiltshire.  There, Britons have seen and photographed an assortment of patterns of flattened grain. 

   Theories about the causes of crop circles range from unconfirmed assumptions about extraterrestrial spaceships allegedly hovering over agricultural land to scientific explanations involving lightning, magnetic fields and unusual wind patterns.  Ieuan Evans, a supervisor in the Alberta government's plant-diseases section in Edmonton, offers an agriculturally based theory: he says that a lack of nutrients, such as copper, in the soil could cause grain to collapse under its own weight.  Still, the most widely accepted explanation comes from Terence Meaden, director of the Circle Effects Research Group in Bradford-on-Avon, near Bath, England.  Meaden, who was once a physics professor at Dalhousie University in Halifax, says that the circles are created by "ring vortices" - electrically charged spinning balls of air that form when winds flow over hills.  According to Meaden, the vortices sometimes touch down briefly in fields, flattening the crops growing there in a circular pattern. 

   Some other experts offer more fanciful explanations.  Noyes, for one, said that whatever is behind the circles "displays an almost limitless inventiveness, an ability to design and redesign."  He added: "What the hell it is, what degree of intelligence it exhibits, I wouldn't know." 

   But whatever their cause, the circles have a strong effect on some of the people who see them.  Last summer, Darrell Roth spotted circles in a neighbor's wheat field near Christopher Lake, 50 km north of Prince Albert, Sask.  Roth, the editor and publisher of the Lake-scapes Weekly, a tourist newspaper, said that one circle was between 60 and 70 feet in diameter and that the wheat inside it was completely flattened.  Around it was a four-to-five-foot-wide band of wheat that was still standing and, beyond that, another two- to three-foot-wide circle in which the wheat had collapsed.  Roth said that about 300 yards away, there was a smaller set of circles.  "It makes you feel a little bit small," said Roth.  "You can't help but think 'Who the heck are we?' when you see something like what I saw." 

   Even pranksters are considered a possible cause of the circles.  Says Gordon Kijek, director of an Edmonton-based group that studies reports of unidentified flying objects: "We could end up tomorrow with a group stepping forward and saying, 'We did it, and here's how we did it.' "  After the two crop circles were discovered near Lethbridge last week, Kijek collected grain and soil samples from one site and sent them to a provincial laboratory in Edmonton for testing.  Still, he says that he suspects some form of intelligent being was involved.  "It's so precise and so neat and so unreal," Kijek added.  "It doesn't look like a random act of nature."  But the search for the real answers about the mystery so far has taken a circular route. 

    </I

  A GLIMPSE OF HEAVEN: the sun's corona blazed in a darkened sky 

   It was an event so rare in nature that some scientists and curious laymen travelled thousands of miles to points along Mexico's Baja peninsula to watch.  Others viewed last week's eclipse of the sun in Hawaii after arriving by aircraft or aboard luxury cruise ships.  Altogether, millions of people, including at least 200,000 visitors from scores of countries, watched from Hawaii to Brazil as the longest and most spectacular solar eclipse of the century briefly plunged some parts of the world into darkness on July 11.  "It was so incredibly eerie and spectacular," said Michael Watson, a Toronto lawyer and amateur astronomer who led 155 members of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada to Baja for the eclipse.  "I have never seen anything like it." 

   During a period in which the eclipse was visible in the best viewing locations for a maximum of six minutes and 54 seconds, the moon passed between the Earth and the sun, causing the shadow of the moon to blot out the sun's light.  In an area stretching from Hawaii through Baja and over mainland Mexico, south through Latin America and Brazil, darkness descended.  In some areas on the path of the eclipse, birds grew silent and animals acted as though night had fallen.  It was the longest total eclipse of the sun since 1973; there will not be another to equal it until the year 2132.  In most parts of the United States and Canada, the event that some enthusiasts called "the eclipse of the millennium" was seen as partial: typically, in the cloudy sky over Vancouver, only 15 per cent of the sun was obscured. 

   Working from one of the locations where the eclipse could be seen most completely, scientists at Hawaii's Mauna Kea observatory trained seven telescopes and dozens of cameras on the sun in the hope of gathering scientific data that may answer fundamental questions about the sun's chemistry.  Said David Naylor, a professor of physics at Alberta's University of Lethbridge and one of two Canadian scientists who saw the eclipse from Mauna Kea: "It was an absolute miracle that the path of the eclipse passed right overhead of the best observing site on Earth."  For those standing directly beneath the umbra, or dark inner part, of the moon's shadow, the sun's corona, or outer atmosphere, blazed in a darkened sky.  Added Naylor: "This is a once-in-three-lifetimes phenomenon."  But in the end, scientists said, the less-than-perfect weather conditions somewhat obscured the eclipse. 

   Scientists said that few events in nature surpass the eerie effect of a total solar eclipse.  About once every 16 months, the moon briefly passes between the sun and the Earth, blocking the sun's rays.  But such eclipses last only seconds and are visible only on some parts of the Earth's surface.  What made last week's eclipse uncommon was that the moon was exceptionally close to the Earth and the Earth was at its farthest annual point from the sun.  As a result, the eclipse was visible for an unusually long time. 

   Solar eclipses have inspired awe and terror since the dawn of civilization.  Indeed, the word eclipse is derived from the Greek word for abandonment, reflecting an ancient fear that the sun might abandon Earth.  As far back as 2000 BC, Babylonian astronomers discovered how to predict accurately when the moon would obscure the sun.  Historical records show that an eclipse of the sun in 585 BC inspired such fear among warring Medes and Lydians in what is now Turkey that they agreed to make peace. 

   Over the centuries, observations of solar eclipses have produced important scientific results.  During an eclipse in 1868, the English scientist Norman Lockyer discovered the element helium, which makes up a large part of the sun's burning mass of gases.  Starting in 1919, scientists began measuring starlight patterns during solar eclipses in an effort to prove Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.  More generally, the blockage of intense solar light during an eclipse allows scientists to measure the size, activity and composition of the star that sustains life on Earth.  Said Naylor: "We have basically just a few seconds to get an enormous amount of information." 

   Astronomers said that data gathered during the latest eclipse may confirm suspicions about the changing diameter of the sun, which is believed to be 4.5 billion years old and slowly diminishing.  For their part, American and Mexican scientists launched a small rocket 50 miles into the atmosphere during the eclipse from Santiago Ixcuintla, about 200 km north of Guadalajara along the Pacific coast.  Although the $184,000 mission was supposed to record information about solar particles, it failed because of technical difficulties. 

   Most of those gathered for the century's most spectacular celestial event said that they were awestruck by the eclipse.  Said Andrea Hansen, a Toronto screenwriter who saw the eclipse in Baja California, Mexico: "It makes you feel a part of the universe."  Added Watson, who saw his first eclipse from Quebec's Gaspe Peninsula in 1972: "You really get hooked by these astronomical events."  Clearly, for addicts, last week's celestial fix was truly a glimpse of heaven.  </I

   POTENT PARTICLES: a Canadian scientist makes a key discovery 

   In the fall of 1984, John Simpson, a professor of physics at Ontario's University of Guelph, carried out an experiment that produced results that could be crucial to scientists' understanding of the universe - and its ultimate destiny.  Simpson was trying to measure the mass of elementary particles called electron neutrinos, which are emitted from atoms during radioactive decay.  In December of that year, Simpson made a discovery that many other scientists said was probably erroneous: he found that some neutrinos had a much higher mass than scientists had previously believed possible.  But last November, scientists at a laboratory in Berkeley, Calif., disclosed that they had duplicated Simpson's results.  Some physicists said that, as a result, theorists now may face the prospect of having to rethink some widely held theories about the creation and composition of the universe.  Said Gerald Roy, a nuclear physicist at the University of Alberta in Edmonton: "If the theory is correct, it will turn a lot of things upside-down in the physics world." 

   Simpson said that what he discovered in 1984 and in follow-up experiments were neutrinos with two different masses, including some with masses of 17 kiloelectronvolts (the mass of subatomic matter is quoted in units of energy).  Scientists previously said that neutrinos have little or no mass.  Simpson made his discovery with the help of a particle accelerator, a device that shoots atomic particles at one-tenth the speed of light, at McMaster University in Hamilton.  But after Simpson published his findings in the New York City-based journal Physical Review Letters in April, 1985, scientists in Canada, the United States and Europe were unable to duplicate his findings in experiments of their own.  As well, Simpson, a 51-year-old native of North Bay, Ont., who won a scholarship in 1962 to England's Oxford University, where he earned a PhD in physics, said that there was widespread skepticism about his discovery because it caused "some problems with physics as we know it."  He added, "People were not ashamed to tell me they did not believe it." 

   Now, the experimental findings reported by scientists at the U.S. department of energy's Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley could change that.  Eric Norman, a nuclear physicist at that lab, disclosed at a physics conference held in Czechoslovakia in November that experiments carried out in the Berkeley laboratory appeared to confirm Simpson's discovery.  Norman told Maclean's that he subsequently submitted a paper on his findings to Physical Review Letters, and editors at the Review said that Norman's paper was being considered for publication early in 1991. 

   The confirmation of Simpson's discovery could lead to a major revision of accepted theories about the nature, and eventual fate, of the universe.  According to a body of scientific thought known as the big bang theory, the universe was created in a cosmic explosion about 15 billion years ago.  Supporters of the big bang theory say that, ever since, all the matter in the universe, including stars and planets, has been moving away from the starting point and will continue to do so throughout eternity.  But adherents of a rival theory contend that the expanding universe may reach a point at which, if the total mass of the universe is great enough, it will slow down, stop and then begin contracting again towards the centre.  If that happens, some theorists say, the densely compacted mass at the centre of the universe will eventually heat up and destroy itself by exploding again - and set a new universe in motion. 

   Until recently, most physicists calculated that the total mass of the universe was not sufficient to cause it to stop expanding.  But those calculations were based on the belief that neutrinos have virtually no mass.  Although Simpson's findings would only apply to about one-third of all neutrinos, Roy said that if heavy neutrinos exist, then previous calculations would mean that the effect of gravity on them would eventually cause the universe to contract.  The discovery of the heavy neutrinos, said Clifford Hargrove, a physicist at the Ottawa-based Centre for Research in Particle Physics, "challenges the underpinnings of physics regarding the building blocks of matter." 

   Roy added that if Simpson's findings are widely verified, he could be in line for the Nobel Prize in physics, which is awarded annually to scientists who achieve major breakthroughs.  Simpson's discoveries, said Roy, "are that important."  For his part, Norman said that when he began his experiments in California two years ago, he was skeptical about the possibility of heavy neutrinos.  But he added that the result of his laboratory work turned out to be "the most exciting thing I have ever been involved with." 

   Simpson told Maclean's that he had arranged for a leave from his teaching post for the 1990-1991 school year to work on the planned $61-million neutrino observatory under construction more than a mile underground in a mine shaft near Sudbury, Ont.  There, according to Simpson and other scientists, by studying neutrinos that penetrate the Earth's crust from outer space, they may be able to learn more about the tiny particles and the role they play in the unfolding of the universe.  Despite the Sudbury commitment, Simpson said that he would continue to work on his neutrino mass experiments in an effort to confirm the existence of heavy neutrinos.  If he succeeds, excitement over Simpson's discovery would almost certainly be tempered by the questions they raise about the creation, and the future, of the universe.  </I

   BREAKING THE CODE: The world examines the mystery of genes 

   The quest is for the Holy Grail of modern science - a multibillion-dollar international crusade to map in meticulous detail the hundreds of thousands of bits of information that make up the human genetic code, or genome.  Scientists say that the information they hope to discover will offer clues to the causes - and possible cures - of more than 4,000 inherited diseases, as well as many others with suspected genetic links, including heart disease, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.  Others predict that the 15-year project will ultimately allow people to know, and perhaps change, their genetic makeup - or the genes of unborn children.  The project has prompted debate in some medical circles over the ethical implications.  Indeed, some scientists say that the growing fund of genetic knowledge could lead to human rights infringements if people are rejected for jobs or insurance policies because of flaws in their genetic makeup.  At the same time, some Canadian scientists say that bureaucratic wrangling has helped to stall efforts to secure funding for a Canadian role in the massive project. 

   Expected to cost up to $4 billion over the next 15 years, the U.S. Genome Project, launched in 1989, has grown into an international effort involving the work of an estimated 3,000 scientists in the United States, Europe, the Soviet Union and Japan.  Now, Canadian scientists say that they will need up to $150 million to fund a Canadian contribution to the genome map during the next 15 years.  </I

    The gathering of eagles  
  by Bruce Obee 
  "SOON DOZENS, THEN HUNDREDS, APPEAR, AND THE BIG COTTONWOODS SAG UNDER THE WEIGHT OF SO MANY BIRDS" 

   Brackendale is asleep as the eagles gather on the Squamish.  One by one, in pairs and threes, they come down from their night roosts to the river.  Soon dozens, then hundreds, appear, and the big cottonwoods sag under the weight of so many birds.  In the dreary, winter-grey drizzle, a treetop candelabrum of feathered ivory heads is silhouetted against the granite walls of the Tantalus Range. 

   The air is rank with rotting salmon.  Sunrise softens an overcast sky as the eagles move onto the carcasses.  The hungry birds are alone in this hour after dawn, scant respite from the joggers and dogs, paddlers and tourists that soon will disrupt their feeding. 

   For as long as the salmon have come home to spawn, the bald eagles have followed the autumn fish runs to the coastal rivers of British Columbia.  The Bella Coola, Harrison, Dean, Qualicum, Cowichan, and many more.  Day after day, each bird devours nearly a tenth of its own body weight in fish - as much as half a kilo.  In a bountiful year, when 250,000 chum return to the Squamish, the eagles could consume a hundred tonnes of dead salmon.  By February, when all the fish have spawned, the feast is over: the avian carnivores again face the hardship of hunting herring, waterfowl, rabbits, and rodents. 

   The Squamish River runs down from the Coast Mountains into Howe Sound, on the northwest side of Vancouver.  It is the second-largest river, after the Fraser, bringing fresh water to the Strait of Georgia.  When chum are running in the Squamish, huge flocks of scavenging eagles congregate near the community of Brackendale, 10 kilometres upstream from Howe Sound.  The birds feed on the banks of the mainstem and tributaries - the Cheakamus, Cheekye, Mamquam, and Ashlu.  In the winter of 1994, the Squamish had the largest concentration of bald eagles on Earth - 3,769 - 274 more than the world record set in the 1980s at Alaska's Chilkat River. 

  

 

   "When you start talking about 4,000 eagles, you sometimes forget that 25 eagles is a lot," says Thor Froslev, curator of the Brackendale Art Gallery.  When Froslev organized the first Brackendale Winter Eagle Festival in 1986, some 537 were counted.  Each year, with changes in counting effort, weather, and fish runs, eagle numbers vary considerably.  In 1988 more than 2,500 were recorded; in 1991 only 737.  The tallying teams were optimistic in 1994, but on the count day no one expected a world record. 

   "That day that we had nearly 4,000 eagles, I'm running the board in the art gallery, writing down the numbers as they come in," Froslev recalls excitedly.  "In one area there were 200 eagles, then all of a sudden there were 600.  I'm going, 'hmm, that's good.'  But then there was an area where we usually count 600 eagles - there were 1,365.  I nearly fell off the chair.  It was fantastic." 

   Froslev, a 62-year-old transplanted Dane, is an outdoorsman with an entrepreneurial bent.  To him, thousands of eagles landing halfway up the highway between Vancouver and Whistler augur a tourist boon, dependent on the good health of his beloved Squamish River.  The eagles peak around Christmas when tourism is highest at Whistler ski village.  Eagle viewers are increasing, but more could be encouraged to stop over a few hours at Brackendale as they head to the slopes. 

   Eighty percent of the Squamish eagles concentrate on a nine-kilometre stretch of stream between the Cheakamus and Mamquam rivers.  Brackendale sits at the centre of this area, on the east bank where dikes provide access for wildlife watchers.  The river forms a natural boundary, separating the town and tourists from the west bank, where nobody lives. 

   The only protected place for eagles on the Squamish is a 71-hectare ecological reserve at Baynes Island, set aside to save old cottonwoods used by the eagles as daytime perches.  Local conservationists have asked the provincial government to create a 1,077-hectare eagle refuge along both sides of the river.  Alaska's Chilkat Bald Eagle Reserve, by comparison, is 20,000 hectares. 

   "We need a lot more protection on our rivers," Froslev stresses.  "We need that timber on the far side for the eagles, and to help slow the runoff.  It's no good having a river, trying to have fish in it, trying to encourage and enhance birds, unless you've got trees." 

   Recent research suggests that roosting trees could be as important as the food that attracts the eagles.  With adults weighing between three and six kilograms, they consistently choose the largest trees.  On many coastal rivers they perch during the day on the stout branches of mature cottonwoods, close to the water and fish. 

   At night the eagles roost communally, sometimes as far as five kilometres from their food.  Some night roosts are deep in old-growth coniferous forests, sheltered from winter winds, rain, snow, and people.  The same roost sites may be used year after year, yet biologists are uncertain why eagles pick particular places.  If these night roosts and daytime perches are logged, there's no guarantee the birds will simply move to another stand of trees.  They could be forced to abandon a much-needed feeding site. 

   This year more than 1,600 wintering eagles gorged themselves on spawning salmon in the Fraser Valley.  Half these birds foraged the banks of the Harrison River, a Fraser tributary that usually has the third-highest annual count on the continent.  Some 18 communal night roosts are known in the lower Fraser where logging companies are working with wildlife experts to reduce disturbance to wintering eagles.  Seasonal logging in some areas has been delayed until the eagles have left the streams.  At Carey Islands, 10 kilometres downstream from Agassiz, Scott Paper Ltd. became the first B.C. forestry firm to preserve a communal night roost for bald eagles. 

   Eagle advocates hope industrialists at Squamish, on the opposite side of Vancouver, will follow the Fraser Valley example.  The seaport of Squamish has already displaced much of the estuary with its logging, rail yards, dikes, and dredging.  Upstream, logging has begun on the west bank, where the eagles have enjoyed at least some sanctuary from the Brackendale bustle. 

  

   Other concerns are pressing.  BC Rail wants to expand its operations in the lower valley.  An American airline is pushing for scheduled service into Squamish Municipal Airport, which now takes only charter flights.  And increasing helicopter traffic at tree level along the river corridor is often scaring off feeding eagles. 

   "We've got a gem, an absolute world-class gem of a concentration of eagles up there," says Dave Dunbar of the B.C. Wildlife Branch in Surrey.  "It's an envious position to be in for a province to have something that's a world spectacle, yet a lot of people take it for granted." 

   One would hope we'd heed the warnings from earlier in this century when disdain for North American birds of prey almost caused their extinction.  Like other predators, eagles were exterminated by humans as vermin.  Even more devastating was DDT, an insidious pesticide that reduces the calcium content in eggs, causing them to break.  It was spread liberally across North American farms shortly after the Second World War.  Eagle populations were still crashing in 1970 when Canada seriously restricted the use of DDT.  In 1972 it was banned in the U.S., across Canada in 1990. 

   Dunbar now is helping assess the bald eagle's recovery.  A bird and non-game specialist, he's responsible for province-wide eagle counts, which began in 1986.  Each year on a day in mid-January, hundreds of volunteers don winter woollies and gumboots to scour riverbanks, beaches, and wetlands.  The emphasis is on the coast, where ice-free waters, abundant salmon, herring, and waterfowl entice eagles from Alaska, Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and Interior B.C. 

   This year 6,129 eagles were counted in B.C.  The province's total mid-winter population is estimated at 20,000 to 30,000 eagles, about one-third more than in all of the lower 48 states.  With an Alaskan population of 30,000 to 40,000 wintering eagles, the heraldic American national emblem has only this year been downgraded from an endangered to a threatened species in the U.S. 

   With a guesstimated nesting population of 9,000 adults, B.C.'s bald eagles are far from endangered.  But their day-to-day life is nonetheless fraught with hazards, particularly on the urbanized south coast.  Nanaimo veterinarian Ken Langelier examined 490 dead, injured, or ailing bald eagles between 1988 and 1994.  He discovered that one of the most frequent killers - 17.6 percent - is electrocution. 

   Langelier contends that the accelerated pace of oceanfront development is the cause.  As houses go up, trees come down, depleting nesting and perching sites.  Utility poles servicing new subdivisions are an eagle's next best choice.  A skilful fisher, a bald eagle may saturate its wings with salt water as it swoops down to pluck a fish from the sea.  When it perches atop a power pole and spreads its wings a full two metres to dry, it may touch two wires, electrocuting itself as it shorts out the neighbourhood.  Langelier, who has submitted a report to BC Hydro, suggests that wires be strung farther apart and eagle perches be placed above the lines. 

   Another common killer is poisoning - 11.4 percent in Langelier's study.  When they eat tainted prey, eagles ingest carbofurans, barbiturates, mercury, and dioxins. 

   One of the most agonizing toxins is lead.  During the autumn hunting season, eagles often swallow lead shot when feeding on dead or dying waterfowl.  "Lead poisoning is a real insult to the bird's whole physiology," Langelier explains. "It affects the blood vessels, especially in the heart, so they actually develop tiny infarcts, or blockages, like little heart attacks.  Some bald eagles with lead poisoning simply starve to death because they can't breathe, hear, or see, or don't have the physical stamina to capture food.  Or they can be so acutely poisoned that they go into convulsions and die." 

   Thanks to Langelier's vociferous persistence, the government banned hunters across B.C. this year from using lead shot to shoot waterfowl.  "A lot of people feel that eagles are extremely abundant here and there's no need to worry," observes Dave Dunbar.  "I just feel that would be a dangerous attitude toward a species that is highly vulnerable." 

   Ironically, promoting respect for wild eagles also poses a threat.  Squamish eagle viewers "are having a profound impact on the birds' ability to forage there," Dunbar warns.  The eagles are most active in the morning, but early-rising birdwatchers often frighten feeding eagles up into the trees. 

   At Victoria's Goldstream Provincial Park, a "quiet zone" allows the eagles to feed in peace.  In the early 1990s, an average of five dozen foraged the lower reaches of the Goldstream River, where access was restricted.  When the quiet zone was expanded this year to encompass the entire estuary, the number of eagles jumped to 90. 

 

   Park naturalist Carol Berryman has witnessed the effect people have on foraging eagles.  On one winter morning the tide was low and the salmon carcasses were exposed, yet there were no eagles on the flats.  Berryman then noticed two people walking on the estuary.  She chased them off and several eagles immediately came down to feed. 

   "People are really good about not going out there when you explain why," says Berryman.  A video camera and monitor now are set up in a nature house above the estuary to provide a televised view of the birds.  Those who want a closer look can bring high-powered spotting scopes.  "They see many, many more eagles: they just can't get close." 

   Hikers, cyclists, kayakers, and river rafters on the Squamish may face similar restrictions, says Dunbar.  "We could just merrily go on promoting wildlife viewing for eagles and kill the very thing that we're trying to promote ....  We've got just a little golden egg here in British Columbia.  Truly, the province is blessed with a special thing and we've got to make sure we can hang onto it.  We should promote it in a way that doesn't harm the birds."  </I

    BURNS BOG  
  by Bill Burns 
  TEN TIMES THE SIZE OF STANLEY PARK, VANCOUVER'S UNKNOWN WILDERNESS JEWEL IS BEING EATEN AWAY BY DEVELOPMENT AND GARBAGE 

   After hours of hiking through waist-high Labrador tea and salad, I'm beginning to appreciate the enormous size of Burns Bog.  We enter a grove tea of stunted trees, and my guide, Don DeMille, points out mature pines, the tallest barely two metres high.  "Like the bonsai forest?" he grins.  I'm more concerned with the ground, quivering beneath me like a giant waterbed.  "The lagoons aren't far," DeMille says, striding ahead.  Lagoons in a bog?  So much has surprised me on this hiker: I shrug and follow him. 

   Barely out of the "magic forest," I stop, stunned by the wild beauty ahead.  A series of lagoons, bright yellow with blooming water lilies.  Brown and red sphagnum moss carpets the sides of the lagoons.  Two hawks shriek overhead as they spiral upward, their broad tails glowing red.  The soporific scent of Labrador tea float in the air. 

   Like many residents of British Columbia's Lower Mainland, I'd always associated Burns Bog with the Greater Vancouver Regional District's massive garbage dump.  The huge landfill, in Delta, south of the City of Vancouver, takes in part of the bog. 

   I realize now that this is hardly a dump: it's a wilderness in the midst of a metropolis, between the Fraser River and Boundary Bay.  A staggering 4,000 hectares, Burns Bog is 10 times the size of Vancouver's Stanley Park.  </I
  BRAVE NEW WORLD: astronomers may have detected a new planet 

   By most estimates, the neutron star, or pulsar, known as PSR1829-10 may not be much to look at.  In fact, it cannot be seen at all.  Scientists say that the star, located near the centre of the Milky Way, is a dense, dark orb.  It is about 30,000 light years from Earth (light travels through space at 5.878 trillion miles per year) and was formed by a supernova explosion, the spectacular celestial event that occurs when the molten core of a star implodes, sending shock waves right through the universe.  The pulsar, which emits radio waves at regular intervals, was one of 40 such stars discovered in 1985 by scientists at the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories at Jodrell Bank, 30 km south of Manchester, in northern England.  Astronomers using Nuffield's giant radio telescope found that sound pulses emitted by 39 of the neutron stars were unwavering.  But the fluctuating responses from the 40th pulsar led them to a startling conclusion.  In a letter published last week by the British journal Nature, they speculated that the 40th pulsar was being pulled out of its orbit by an orbiting planet.  If that explanation survives the critical scrutiny of the scientific community, the planet will be the first to be detected outside of Earth's Solar System. 

   Scientists have long predicted that other planetary systems must exist and would eventually be found somewhere in the universe.  But despite some claims in the past, scientists have never been able to provide conclusive evidence to justify that theory.  They said that the apparent discovery of another planetary system would have important implications for astronomers' understanding of the universe, and could point the way towards the discovery of other planetary systems.  Said Paul Delaney, a professor of astronomy at Toronto's York University: "Until now, we only knew for sure about one planetary system around one star - the Sun.  This changes everything." 

   The evidence indicating that PSR1829-10 probably has at least one orbiting planet was assembled by three Jodrell Bank astronomers, Andrew Lyne, Matthew Bailes and Setnam Shemar.  Lyne told Maclean's that after the observatory identified the new pulsars six years ago, the lab monitored each of the neutron stars on a regular basis using its 250-foot-diameter Lovell telescope that receives radio waves.  Neutron stars cannot be seen with an optical telescope because their light cannot travel far from the galactic centre.  But he said that he and his colleagues had noticed during routine observations with the giant telescope that PSR1829-10 emitted an irregular pattern of pulses.  Lyne said that after they detected that pattern, he and Bailes, an Australian who began working at the Nuffield Laboratories only 18 months ago, tested their observations against established mathematical models in an attempt to explain the fluctuations.  Lyne said that it was not until last May that it occurred to them that they might have discovered a planet.  Said Lyne: "It was a purely serendipitous discovery." 

   The Jodrell Bank astronomers said that although the pulsar usually gave off a regular pattern of pulses, they observed that at times the pulses would slow by one one-hundredth of a second.  Then, three months later, the pulses would speed up again.  After recording several cycles, Lyne said, the astronomers concluded that the pulsar was "being tugged a bit" by a planet with an almost circular, six-month orbit.  "The most natural interpretation of this pulse variation is that the star has a companion orbiting around it," Lyne said. 

   The discovery of another planetary system, which has yet to be confirmed by other astronomers, came after years of fruitless effort by astronomers around the world.  During the past decade, scientists have been able to look ever deeper into space with the aid of sophisticated new telescopes capable of producing high-resolution images of celestial bodies.  Still, Delaney said that while these tools have come tantalizingly close to finding other planetary systems, none has provided enough evidence to satisfy the scientific community.  He said that the powerful telescopes could not overcome the blinding glare that obscures the view of objects surrounding bright, relatively young stars, including the Sun.  Because the Jodrell Bank telescope responds to radio waves coming from distant objects in space, rather than light, glare does not affect it. 

   Excitement among scientists over the possible detection of another planetary system was tempered by disappointment that it is too far away to be seen - and by the fact that the planet is unlikely to support any form of life.  Lyne said that the planet orbiting the pulsar probably has a mass of about 12 times that of Earth, and a circumference that may be two to three times that of Earth's.  The inspected planet apparently orbits its pulsar sun at a distance of about 67.24 million miles, roughly equal to the distance between the Sun and the planet Venus.  Astronomers also speculated that the planet is under constant bombardment by high levels of deadly radiation from its host neutron star.  Said Gerald Quinlan, a research associate at the Toronto-based Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics: "It is highly unlikely that any life form could survive in that environment." 

   Although other scientists will almost certainly challenge the Nuffield team's report to see if the interpretation bears scrutiny, some astronomers said that the evidence provided by Bailes, Lyne and Shemar appears convincing.  "It is the strongest piece of substantive evidence that our Solar System is not unique," Delaney said.  For his part, Gordon Walker, a professor of astronomy at the University of British Columbia, said that the use of a radio telescope in the Nuffield experiments was similar to being caught speeding by a policeman's radar gun.  "It is very hard to argue with him when that number appears on the screen," Walker said.  Still, Lyne said that it was too early to regard his team's findings as conclusive.  "I think that the observations are secure," he said.  "But there may just be something else going on with that pulsar." 

   If the Nuffield results are verified, the discovery will confront astronomers with new questions.  Walker said that the presence of the planet next to a pulsar challenges the commonly held belief that a star's planetary system would be wiped out by the catastrophic explosion of a supernova, which creates a pulsar.  And even if it did survive, many astronomers say that the explosion should have knocked the planet out of its almost perfectly circular orbit.  But Walker said that it was possible that the planet could have been formed by the debris from the host star's supernova, which occurred about one million years ago.  Said Walker: "That is not much time to allow a planet to form out of the debris." 

   As scientists studied the Nuffield findings, Lyne, Shemar and Bailes said that they planned to do new experiments.  Lyne said that there is some evidence suggesting that PSR1829-10 may have more than one planet.  But he added that it could take up to 10 years to determine whether there are other planets.  "It's an exciting concept that our Solar System is not unique," he said.  "It gives us another step forward in projecting our imaginations into outer space."  Clearly, if the theory advanced by Lyne and his colleagues is correct, many more astronomical horizons remain to be crossed. 

  THE MILKY WAY 

   Planet X is an orbiting object that astronomers say they have located near a distant pulsar, or neutron star.  It may be the first planet to be located outside of Earth's Solar System.  The pulsar, which is about 30,000 light years from the solar system of which Earth is a part, is located near the centre of the Milky Way.  Planet X apparently orbits at about the same distance from the pulsar as the planet Venus does from the Sun.  Unlike planets in Earth's Solar System, Planet X is much larger than its sun.  The dense pulsar rotates at speeds of up to 1,000 revolutions per second. 

    </I

   THE BIG PICTURE: NASA plans satellites to track the climate 

   As experts increasingly recognize the worldwide nature of pollution and other environmental hazards, many scientists say that they have become convinced that the problem must be studied on a global basis.  As a result, the Washington-based National Aeronautics and Space Administration is currently developing six 15-ton satellites, which would be the largest unmanned spacecraft ever launched by the United States, in order to study climate patterns and environmental change from space.  Called the Earth Observing System (EOS), the 15-year project, estimated to cost $35 billion, will gather data continuously on such diverse phenomena as polar ice, tropical storms and atmospheric pollutants, beginning in 1998.  Scientists say that they hope the data will lead to important new discoveries about subjects ranging from tropical rain-forest destruction to Prairie wheat yields.  Said James Drummond, a University of Toronto physicist who is designing an instrument for the project: "We need an integrated set of measurements to understand the continuity of climate change." 

   The elaborate EOS satellites will collect enough information on the Earth's environment every day to fill the memories of 50,000 personal computers.  Advocates of the project also maintain that the data will vastly improve the accuracy of assessing environmental problems, leading to possible scientific solutions.  Since NASA proposed the project in 1988, hundreds of scientists from more than 15 countries, including Canada, have begun designing equipment that may eventually be used on the satellites.  Said Gordon McBean, a University of British Columbia climatologist who is regarded as a world authority on climate change: "We need a massive global experiment like EOS to deal with the Earth as a system." 

   But other scientists claim that megaprojects like EOS consume too much research money and talent.  Andrew Lacis, a New York City-based climatologist with the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said that an entire scientific discipline can suffer when a megaproject fails to perform according to expectations.  He noted that NASA's $1.85-billion Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April, will take three more years to achieve its design potential because the main mirror has failed to focus accurately the light that strikes it from outer space.  Said Lacis: "Megaprojects have a way of slipping and being delayed and going wrong." 

   So far, the scientific community has supported NASA's proposal to have EOS in operation in eight years.  If that happens, there will eventually be two satellites always in north-south orbit around the Earth at an altitude of nearly 440 miles.  Each spacecraft will pass near the poles once a day, and some of its instruments will gather data across a 700-mile-wide swath of the Earth's surface.  The first satellite will probably monitor changes in vegetation, ice cover and precipitation, while the second, scheduled for launching before the year 2000, would measure such natural phenomena as continental drift, atmospheric ozone levels, wind speeds and temperatures. 

   Canadian scientists have eagerly joined the competition to design equipment that could be used on board the satellites or as ground-based support.  The U of T's Drummond is developing an instrument to measure carbon monoxide and methane, two atmospheric gases that may be important factors in climate change.  Drummond said that the instrument is among 20 being designed for use on the first satellite.  He added that NASA plans to select 12 to 16 devices by the end of this month.  Meanwhile, the Ottawa-based Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, a branch of Energy, Mines and Resources, is leading several global-change studies that incorporate and interpret the data collected from EOS.  Said Barry Goodison, co-ordinator of space programs at Environment Canada's Canadian Climate Centre, and one of 35 Canadian scientists involved in the studies: "We see this as an opportunity to push Canada into more Earth observation research." 

   Many scientists say that EOS could lead to international action on global pollution.  Ellsworth LeDrew, a University of Waterloo, Ont., geography professor who is involved in the Canada Climate Centre's studies, said that scientists must provide a clearer understanding of the extent and causes of environmental damage before governments can be expected to take co-ordinated action.  
