   In the middle of nowhere, at the centre of all things, 
   Dance to the music of time  
  by Michael Crabb 

   For those with a taste for statistics the first fifty years of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet could be counted in numbers of toeshoes beaten to a pulp, of cities visited on five continents, of original ballets created, and of disasters that have periodically challenged the 26-member company's legendary stamina and pure grit.  Impressive, but meaningless without the story of the remarkable human beings who have consistently breathed life into an institution that by all common-sense reckoning should never have happened. 

   First, let's take Winnipeg.  No one would imply that the Prairie capital was a cultural wasteland when those redoubtable and very English ladies Gwenneth Lloyd and Betty Farrally arrived in 1938.  There was music, there was theatre; above all there was a burning civic pride.  Even so, great ballet companies have traditionally emerged in larger, richer, more cosmopolitan and more strategically placed cities.  Winnipeg was a long way from anywhere and even now when curious foreigners reach for an atlas to discover exactly where it is they must be struck by the seeming improbability of such a city giving birth to a vigorous cultural flower. 

   Second, let's take Canada.  Until Lloyd and Farrally decided to make a go of things in their adopted home nobody else had succeeded in establishing a permanent ballet troupe here.  There were attempts, of course - most notably by Boris Volkoff in Toronto - but none that had the originality and vigour of the new Winnipegers.  Canada in 1938, though receptive enough to distinguished ballet companies from abroad, was still unfertile soil for the growth of an indigenous dance culture. 

   Lloyd and Farrally turned both conditions to their advantage.  If Winnipeg was isolated, they could forge a company that suited their environment; a robust troupe that would appeal to the people, that could dance ballets about wheat and hydro-electricity as easily as it could recreate the elegance of traditional toeshoes and tutus.  If Canadians seemed content to patronize imported dance attractions, Lloyd and Farrally would deliver something different, something more attuned to the particular energy of a young, ambitious nation. 

   It took more than Lloyd and Farrally to bring these dreams to fruition.  Although the Winnipeg Ballet (it picked up the useful "Royal" title in 1953) can trace its formal origins to 1939 it could not call itself fully professional until a decade later.  By then rival Torontonians were beginning to formulate plans for their own "Canadian" ballet company.  (To this day Celia Franca, founder of the National Ballet of Canada, maintains that on her arrival in 1950 she was assured that the Winnipeg Ballet had ceased operations.) 

   A tenuous first decade proved that homegrown dance could find a footing against such odds as chronic lack of money and an inadequate supply of well-trained dancers.  Even the disastrous fire of June 1954, which destroyed most of the RWB's material assets - including the notes of Lloyd's many choreographies - could not consume the ambitions of those who stayed to clear up the mess.  This crippling, almost paralyzing disaster ushered in a turbulent period in the RWB's history that saw the final exodus of Lloyd and Farrally and the installation (in 1958) of Arnold Spohr as artistic director.  Spohr was a former company dancer, a tall, lean, elegant partner for the Winnipeg Ballet's leading ladies.  When American choreographer and director Benjamin Harkarvy shook the dust of Winnipeg from his heels just weeks before scheduled performances, the company board turned to Spohr for temporary help.  The result was the best shows the RWB had given in years and Spohr was persuaded to take up permanent residence.  He stayed for thirty years and still has his own office in the impressive new $10 million home the RWB built for itself in 1988. 

   Under Spohr the company began to attract international attention, but it was another decade before the RWB's triumphant gold-medal-winning visit to the 1968 Paris International Ballet Festival.  Before that Spohr and his board of directors had had to deal with the threat of extinction as the young Canada Council debated whether the country could really afford three ballet troupes.  Spohr, always a great believer in tradition and loyalty, had no desire to wrench the RWB from the populist image it had enjoyed under Lloyd and Farrally.  Although the RWB presented Canada's first indigenous full-length ballet (Rose Latulippe, with choreography by Brian Macdonald) in 1966, the company did not tackle another full-length work until John Neumeier's version of The Nutcracker ten years later.  For the most part Spohr stuck to the proven formula of a repertoire of shorter works that could be mixed and matched to create programs with broad appeal. 

   The mixing and matching, however, was artful in the extreme.  It was accomplished with one eye cannily focussed on audience taste and the other on the needs of the RWB's constantly improving ensemble of dancers.  In this respect Spohr served both sides of the footlights well.  With his natural curiosity and eye for talent he became accomplished at grabbing emerging choreographers - Macdonald, Vesak, Neumeier, Araiz - before they became too well known.  He was willing to shock his audiences with the uncompromising realism of Vesak's The Ecstasy of Rita Joe, jolt their political sensitivities with Kurt Jooss' classic anti-war ballet The Green Table or make an appeal to the youth of Canada with Neumeier's The Game (set to a rock version of Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition).  Spohr's vision of dance encompassed a range that also included the elegant dance-for-dance's-sake of Dutch choreographer Hans van Manen, the foot-stomping good humour of Agnes de Mille's Rodeo, the prettiness of Frederick Ashton's Les Patineurs and the poetic charm of Fokine's Les Sylphides. 

   The RWB embraced eclecticism long before other companies around the world acknowledged it as a valid - and marketable - approach.  Then, just when the RWB had been pigeonholed as the "something-for-everyone" company of mixed bills, Arnold Spohr set about giving Winnipegers the kind of multi-act spectacles that everyone had come to assume were the prerogative of the National Ballet.  First came Rudi van Dantzig's Romeo and Juliet, then Giselle and most recently Swan Lake.  The timing of these productions, as critics hastily pointed out, coincided with the rise to fame of the RWB's most brilliant and bankable dancer, 1980 gold medal-winner at the prestigious Varna ballet competition, Evelyn Hart.  Certainly it made sense to mount the kind of ballets that could do justice to Hart's talent and ambition. 

   In 1970 Spohr had encouraged former principal dancer David Moroni to develop a professional training program as an extension of the RWB's general and profitable community ballet school.   When Hart felt smothered by the hothouse pressures of Toronto's National Ballet School it was to Moroni that she had come for help.  Both Moroni and Spohr looked to Russia for inspiration and through the legendary teacher Vera Volkova, in her time the major exponent of the Vaganova training system, the RWB's professional school began to produce dancers with a distinctly more expansive and dynamic way of moving than those to be found in either Montreal or Toronto. 

   When Spohr decided to mount the big story ballets it was because the company was ready for the challenge, because it had to prove itself in works that are still regarded as the acid test of a ballet troupe's classical credentials.  It was an antidote to those perhaps unintentionally patronising descriptions of the RWB as "prairie fresh" and "youthfully exuberant".  It was proof that the RWB was not somehow caught in permanent adolescence. 

   It would be foolish to pretend that the RWB can pull off a Swan Lake or Giselle with the same depth and finesse as the much larger seventy-member National Ballet.  The RWB is still a company of individuals with a variety of physiques that often run counter to the demands of pure classicism.  Nevertheless, Spohr would never have produced these works if he had doubted for a moment that his company could dance them with integrity - an integrity founded in total dramatic conviction and a sensitivity to the nuances of style.  The RWB dances the classics its own way, but they are still the classics. 

   One of the dangers of artistic eclecticism as practiced by Spohr during his thirty-year directorship is that the company itself never assumes an identity, that it remains faceless.  Yet nobody who has seen the RWB perform would ever call it faceless.  Even if it lacks a consistent physical style it has a distinctive approach to the business of performing that is strongly linked to the troupe's populist roots.  Where the National Ballet at times looks more concerned to impress with its sheer magnificence, the RWB always evinces an insistent urge to communicate.  It is a company with personality, with a winning stage manner that sometimes flirts dangerously with cuteness, that overtly sets out to entertain and that (in David Moroni's words) "never looks down at its audience." 

   Oddly enough, it is questionable whether that enduring personality that survives the perennial flow of dancers, of staff changes and even changes of director, could have happened anywhere else but Winnipeg.  As Evelyn Hart describes it, "there is a special commitment about the people who come to work here.  They are here because they are committed to dance." 

   Now, as it is celebrating its 50th anniversary, the RWB is having to endure one of the most emotional upheavals in its history, the cumulative effect of three deaths.  One, that of co-founder Betty Farrally, is a symbolic loss; the other two, those of newly installed director Henny Jurriens and principal dancer David Peregrine, are of more practical consequence.  Jurriens, who died with his wife in a car crash (on the same day Farrally died of cancer), had already proved himself an exceptional leader.  The dancers still feel genuinely bereft.  The vision of the future shown them by Jurriens appears to have been snatched away and the company must begin its second half-century under a veil of uncertainty. 

   That future, however, became a little clearer on February 2, when the Royal Winnipeg Ballet announced it had found a new artistic director to take over immediately from interim head Andre Lewis.  After an intensive search, the RWB's board of directors named Australian-born John Meehan.  As Meehan himself admitted, the company is taking a calculated risk picking him since Meehan has no previous experience directing a ballet company.  However, he has much else to recommend him.  As a former star of the Australian Ballet and of American Ballet Theatre, Meehan won critical acclaim for the nobility and theatrical flair of his dancing.  Canadian audiences had a chance to sample this two years ago when Meehan starred with Karen Kain in a CBC-TV production of The Merry Widow.  Meehan, who turns 40 in May, says he has now retired from dancing but the wealth of experience gained in a career that spans Broadway, London's West End and even a stint on television's The Love Boat is certain to prove valuable as he takes over the Royal Winnipegers. 

   Those who know Meehan well describe him as friendly and open - qualities that should suit him admirably to the almost family atmosphere of Canada's oldest dance troupe.  Meehan's task is to build on the traditions established by Arnold Spohr and on the vision of the future offered by Henny Jurriens. 

   Michael Crabb is a producer for CBC Radio's The Arts Tonight.  </I

    SELLING CANADIAN CULTURE  
   Kevin Teichroeb personally shortens the distance from sea to shining sea  

   There's a man with a mission at Theatrebooks, Toronto's performing arts specialty bookstore.  Manager Kevin Teichroeb wants to put information about the arts into the hands of readers all over Canada.  Travelling across the country revealed to Teichroeb a surprisingly high demand for Canadian material.  "People are isolated because we make them isolated," he says. "This is an age of communications technology; there's no reason anyone should be unable to get the hooks they want." Teichroeb has a wide vision of Canadian culture; "I think the world perspective is the exciting thing," he says. 

   Theatrebooks, whose clients are mostly teachers and theatre professionals, will take orders from anywhere in Canada.  </I

<I

  The Niagara shoot 

   Jock Carroll got the assignment of a lifetime when he was sent to photograph Marilyn Monroe on the set of Niagara.  She wasn't at all what he'd expected ... 

   It was over forty years ago on Thursday, June 5, 1952.  Harry Truman was president, the Cold War had escalated into the Korean War, the United States had set off its first nuclear bomb, and the popular songs of the year were "Kisses Sweeter Than Wine" and Hoagy Carmichael's version of "In the Cool, Cool, Cool of the Evening". 

   I was about to have lunch with Marilyn Monroe.  A few days earlier, Marilyn had descended on Niagara Falls, Ontario, with a film crew of sixty, which included the actors Joseph Cotten, Jean Peters, and Casey Adams, and the famous director Henry Hathaway.  They had come to make the film Niagara.  

   At my elbow a chubby film publicity man named Frank Neill was on the phone to Marilyn, arranging a lunch for the Rainbow Room in the General Brock Hotel overlooking the Falls.  

   I heard him say, "All right, honey.  He's here to do a photo spread for Weekend Magazine.  That's the biggest publication in Canada.  Fine, honey.  We'll wait for you at the top of the elevator." 

   Hanging up, Neill turned to me.  "She says she'll come right up.  But that may mean one hour or two hours."  He shook his head.  "God knows what she'll be wearing.  Here's somebody who's potentially one of the richest women in Hollywood, and she's arrived here with practically no clothes.  No clothes, but lots of books.  Still, she handles herself well." 

   "Apart from that, I don't go out to nightclubs.  I don't go out much at all - even to premieres.  The studio made a fuss when I wouldn't go to the premiere of All About Eve.  They said it was a must.  But they got over it.  Sometimes, after putting in a good day's work, I can enjoy a glass of wine with friends.  But I can't force myself into that sort of thing.  And of course I read a lot."
 "What are you reading now?"
 "I'm reading The Thinking Body by Mabel Ellsworth Todd.  And I've just finished Letters to a Young Poet by Rainer Maria Rilke.  I read The Prophet.  And I love Whitman and Thomas Wolfe."  She looked at me.  "What do you think of Wolfe?"
  Flustered, I replied, "Well, I think he's a great subjective writer.  Maybe somewhat undisciplined.  I read that he turns in million-word manuscripts and that his editor, Maxwell Perkins, has to cut them in half in order to get them to book size"
  "You'd understand all that," said Marilyn, "if you read his book How to Write a Novel.  I've just finished it." 

   Perhaps thinking that I would get lost in literature, Neill addressed a question to Marilyn.  "Is it true what you said to Hathaway about the calendar?" Marilyn laughed.  "Yes, it's true.  But it wasn't Hathaway."  She explained to me.  "They keep asking if it's true I had nothing on when I posed for that calendar nude.  Yesterday I said, 'Oh, no.  I had the radio on'." 

   We all laughed.  I asked, "If it wasn't Hathaway, who was it?"  "It doesn't matter," said Marilyn.  "If you want to use it, give it to Hathaway."  She went on.  "Funny how shocked people in Hollywood were when they learned I'd posed in the nude.  At one time I'd always said no when photographers asked me.  But you'll do it when you get hungry enough.  It was at a time when I didn't seem to have much future.  I had no job and no money for the rent.  I was living in the Hollywood Studio Club for Girls.  I told them I'd get the rent somehow.  So I phoned up Tom Kelley, and he took these two colour shots - one sitting up, the other lying down.  I didn't think I'd done anything wrong.  His wife, Natalie, was there during the shooting.  I earned the fifty dollars that I needed.  But people were shocked when they recognized me." 

   The nude photo for which Marilyn was paid fifty dollars was sold by the photographer for $500.  The calendar manufacturer was reported to have made a million dollars when the calendar caught on.  

   Marilyn's lunch was interrupted by a procession of autograph hounds who pushed bits of paper and menus almost in her face.  Marilyn obliged with a smile, but she observed in an aside, "I look forward to the day when I'll be free of all this."  She added sombrely, "And perhaps free of depression." 

   As it was becoming almost impossible to talk, Neill called for the check and we left the Rainbow Room.  

   For the next several days I dogged Marilyn's footsteps around the set of Niagara with a couple of Leica cameras around my neck.  Picture opportunities were few but I came to be accepted as part of the scenery by the crew and, more importantly, by Marilyn. 

   One afternoon I accompanied her on a publicity tour put on for local officials.  She made presentations, posed for group photos, and did a dutiful tour of a local factory.  Marilyn brightened up my factory photos by loosening the straps of her blouse, leaning over a piece of machinery to give my camera a good view of her breasts, and flashing her best smile.  

   Another day Neill arrived at my room with news.  "Marilyn isn't shooting today," he said, "and she says she'll go out with you for colour shots after she's through with her hairdresser and make-up man." 

   On our way to Marilyn's room, Neill said, "She likes you.  Because you're taking time to get to know her."  Neill seemed to think this was cleverness on my part, whereas it was simply my lack of experience.  

   After the hairdresser and Neill departed for other duties, I was left with Marilyn and her make-up man, Whitey, who went to work on Marilyn's face.  Some time later the phone rang.  "It's New York calling," said Marilyn.  Whitey and I knew this meant Joe DiMaggio so we discreetly withdrew to the hotel corridor.  

   Whitey liked Marilyn and began talking about her.  "She takes life pretty seriously.  Have you noticed while she's sitting around on the set, she always has a script in her hands?  Well, she's not studying her lines.  No, she has one of those deep soul books hidden in the script.  Rilke, Franck, Freud, or maybe Emerson.  She finds something in a book she thinks is true and she writes herself a little note about it.  You know, 'You don't save souls in bunches,' or, 'All life is a road of discovery leading to yourself."  That sort of thing" 

   "She wants to be right, all the time.  They don't have much of a life, you know.  Reporters or photographers all the time.  If they go out in public, a crowd gathers.  I wouldn't want it." 

   Marilyn let us back into her room and began skipping about like a little girl.  "I'm going to New York for the weekend!" she cried.  "If Hathaway will let me!" 

   She put in a call to the director and, while waiting for him to call back, ran around the room picking up clothes and a little hat and holding them against her while she examined herself in the mirror.  

   She groaned.  "I haven't got a thing with me - just slacks and a skirt.  When they said Canada, I thought it would be up in the mountains somewhere.  Jean Peters lent me this suit - but it doesn't fit around the hips, does it?  Maybe Wardrobe will have something." 

   The phone rang. 

   She dumped the clothes on the bed and grabbed the phone, talking excitedly.  She made another call.  She talked more, her voice gradually rising.  

   When she put down the phone, she said, "They're passing the buck.  Hathaway says I can leave if the unit manager says I can.  The unit manager says it's all right with him, but Hathaway will have to take the responsibility.  Neither of them will.  And they promised before that I could go if I didn't have scenes coming up." 

   She sat down and Whitey began working on her face again.  "Whitey," she asked, "do you think I'm being unreasonable?"  Whitey shook his head.  

   "Don't say so," said Marilyn, "if you think I am.  I haven't had any time off for the past four pictures." 

   "I don't think you're unreasonable," Whitey replied.  "But, on the other hand, I didn't think they'd let you go, either.  If the weather's bad tomorrow, they'll have to shoot indoors and they'll need you." 

   Marilyn went to the phone again.  "I'll have to put in another call to Joe and tell him they won't let me come." 

   When the call came through Whitey and I trooped outside once more, but this time we could hear her voice through the door - 

   "But darling!  They won't let me come!  Don't you understand?  Don't you believe me, darling?"  Her voice was distraught.  "But Joe - " 

   The call ended abruptly as though Joe had slammed down the phone.  It was a long ten-minute wait before Marilyn opened her door again.  Her eyes were wet and her mascara had run.  

   She sat down in front of the mirror and looked at herself.  She managed a kind of smile.  "I'm sorry, Whitey, but I guess you'll have to do my eyes over again."  By the time Whitey had repaired her face the afternoon had almost gone, but Marilyn said we should take our planned drive.  It was a beautiful sunny afternoon and I drove around the Niagara peninsula looking for a haystack.  I had some naive idea that I needed one as a backdrop for a colour photo.  We couldn't find a haystack and in retrospect I realize I should have just stopped anywhere and photographed her against a rail fence, a barn, a field of grain.  She didn't need a backdrop.  

   After a while I looked over and saw that Marilyn had fallen asleep, curled up in the front seat beside me.  I didn't have the heart to pursue the project any more that day and drove her back to the hotel.  She walked barefoot up the front steps of the hotel, carrying her shoes in her hand.  I grabbed a shot of that.  

   When I had parked my car and returned, the hotel doorman called me over.  He was almost beside himself with delight.  "When you let her out of your car and she came in barefoot, - she stopped in front of my desk to put on her shoes.  When she bent over one of them fell right out! "  The doorman, at least, had had a good day.  

   Later that evening Neill caught up with me.  "Well," he asked, "have you or haven't you?  You have to admit I gave you every opportunity today."  I began to explain that it hadn't been that kind of day, but he thought I was evading the question and interrupted me.  

   "Okay," he said, "you're not going to talk.  Probably just as well.  A good friend of mine with Associated Press was banging Rita Hayworth regularly.  When Zanuck [head of 20th Century-Fox] found out, he had him barred from the lot.  Permanently.  How did you do for pictures?" 

   "Two grab shots," I said.  "One trying on Jean Peters's clothes.  The other of her walking barefoot up the steps of the hotel."  "Well, better luck next time," said Neill.  "We'll see when she's free again." 

   I was having some success in getting candid shots of Marilyn around the set over the next few days, but little success in setting up a session for a colour cover.  It depended on her shooting schedule and sufficient time for her hairdresser and make-up man to prepare her for colour close-ups.  

   And there was her tendency to be late for appointments.  
 

   "The secret of a base," she said, "is to take most of it off.  That's where most women go wrong."  She applied witch hazel, then patted herself with tissue.  "See?  I'm taking most of it off." 

    Death of a Liberator, 1838  
  By Lennard Sillanpaa 

   During the early morning of 12 November 1838, Nils Gustaf von Schoultz crossed into Upper Canada at the head of a 190-man American invasion force.  His objectives were liberty, the expulsion of British "tyranny" from North America, and the establishment of a domestic republican form of government for Canadians. 

   Their landing at a place called Windmill Point, located two kilometres east of the community of Prescott on the upper St. Lawrence River, was to be the launching of a "bloodless liberation" of Upper Canada sponsored by an American group called the Hunters' Society of Onondaga County, New York.  In the ensuing five days of fighting between Americans and Canadians, 37 men died and 89 were wounded.  This attempted American invasion was an episode in the rebellions of 1837-38. 

   Less than one month later on 8 December Nils von Schoultz was hanged and buried at Fort Henry in Kingston.  Like others before him and since, von Schoultz came to learn that Canadians are different from their American neighbours.  On the night before his execution, in a final letter to a friend, he wrote: 

  Let no further blood be shed; and believe me, from what I have seen, that all the stories that were told about the sufferings of the Canadian people were untrue.  

   Nils von Schoultz was a tragic figure whose brief appearance on the stage of Canadian history helped shape the development of this emerging nation.  In the days between his capture and execution, he also came to have a significant impact on the political development of a future Canadian prime minister. 

   Nils Gustaf von Schoultz was born on 7 October 1807 in Kuopio, Finland, the second son of a circuit court judge.  In 1808, during the Napoleonic wars, Russian troops crossed the Finnish frontier and his family fled to Sweden. 

   After the Treaty of Fredrikshamn in 1808 many officials and refugees returned to Finland, but von Schoultz's parents chose to remain in Sweden. 

   In 1821, the young Nils von Schoultz qualified for the Royal Military Academy in Stockholm where an older brother was already following a military career.  By December 1823, von Schoultz was promoted to second lieutenant in the Svea Regiment of Artillery.  In November 1830, he received an honourable discharge from the military. 

   In early 1831 stories from Poland reached Sweden that told of czarist repression and of fierce resistance by students and cadets in Warsaw.  Many Swedes decided to assist the Poles against their Russian masters.  One of these was von Schoultz who left for Poland in secrecy in 1831 and plunged headlong into the defence of Warsaw. 

   Von Schoultz later made his way to France where he joined the Foreign Legion in North Africa, moving on, in March of 1833, to join his family in Florence where his sister was studying music. 

   A year later he married Ann Cordelia Campbell in the English church at Florence.  His wife was a member of a well-established Scottish merchant family from Edinburgh.  The couple settled in Karlskrona, Sweden, where both their daughters were born. 

   Von Schoultz tried to settle down to a normal family life as a businessman-inventor but does not seem to have been successful.  In June 1836, he visited London on business.  His family remained in Sweden.  A month later, without telling anyone, he left for the United States. 

   While he officially gave his nationality as Swedish, von Schoultz began passing himself off as a Pole.  He was known to everyone as a former officer in the Polish Army who had been forced to leave his homeland by Russian oppressors. 

   Von Schoultz became interested in the salt industry developing around the upstate New York towns of Syracuse and Salina (Salina later merged to become part of Syracuse).  He came to have many friends in Salina, which was located near the Canadian border. 

   In December 1837 authorities in Upper Canada put down an attempted rebellion.  Many of the leaders of this uprising fled to the United States where they found sympathetic support for their proposals to liberate Canada from the oppression of British colonial rule. 

   Throughout 1838, a number of forces operating out of the United States conducted a series of raids and acts of piracy along the Canadian border.  Newspapers, local government officials and merchants in the border states led the campaign to "liberate" Canada.  Officials in Washington, under the administration of President Martin van Buren, however, were more cautious, so these liberation enthusiasts had to operate under the cloak of secrecy. 

   One organization that sprang to life in 1838 was the Patriot Hunters which formed hundreds of "Hunters' Lodges" throughout the border states, recruited some 40,000 members and raised tens of thousands of dollars for the purchase of arms. 

   The Hunters' Lodge of Salina recruited von Schoultz to their cause.  Von Schoultz, for his part, eagerly accepted the role of liberating Canada from what he believed to be the oppression of Britain. 

   One of the leading Hunters in New York state, John Ward Birge, devised a plan to capture the British garrison of Fort Wellington located in Prescott.  Directly opposite Prescott was Ogdensburg, New York, which was a hotbed of Hunter sympathizers.  Birge believed that the seizing of Fort Wellington, one of the main British garrisons along the Canadian-American border, would prompt dissatisfied Canadians to rise up in revolt. 

   Birge began recruiting a force of some 300 men, arms and ammunition, cannon, and vessels for this attack.  One of those he recruited was the recently arrived Nils von Schoultz. 

   Through the summer and fall of 1838, the Government of Upper Canada heard reports from informants living in the United States regarding the growth of popular American sentiment in favour of invading Canada and of the buildup of men, money and weapons in American communities along the border.  The government began to re-build Fort Wellington, and to establish a number of militia units in communities near the American border. 

   During the night of Sunday, 11 November an American steamer towing two schooners entered Canadian waters.  The private invasion force assembled by Birge - who had given himself the grandiose military title of "Major-General" - was aboard these vessels. 

   Near Prescott, the lines to the two schooners were cut.  An attempt at a surprise docking at the wharf in Prescott was sighted by residents who raised the alarm.  The two schooners retreated into the waters of the river and then separated. 

   At this point, the invasion of Canada by the Hunters became a combination of organizational chaos and low farce.  The larger of the two schooners grounded on a sandbar in American waters.  The smaller one, which had von Schoultz on board, landed on the Canadian side of the river at Windmill Point and began unloading its men and equipment. 

   Low farce occurred when "Major-General" Birge suddenly developed what he claimed was a stomach disorder and abruptly retired from the scene.  Others also decided to remain in Ogdensburg.  More than one hundred insurgents never made it to the Canadian side. 

   Later that Monday, officials of the United States Navy arrived in Ogdensburg and prevented any more attempts by American vessels to cross.  By Tuesday, there was little communication between Ogdensburg and Windmill Point. 

   When the insurgents at Windmill Point realized that Birge would not be joining them, von Schoultz was chosen as commander. 

   The American insurgents might have been more successful despite their appalling lack of preparation.  While the landing at Windmill Point was totally unplanned, the insurgents were fortunate to find a massive stone windmill some 20 metres high surrounded by several stone buildings.  From the top of the mill one could easily reconnoitre the surrounding area for enemy troop movements.  For an experienced military commander such as Nils von Schoultz, Windmill Point could have served as a perfect site for establishing a beachhead on enemy territory until reinforcements arrived. 

   The British and Canadians quickly collected a large force of regular soldiers and militia numbering nearly 2,000 men.  On Tuesday morning of that week the two sides engaged in a fierce rifle and musket battle.  Finding the insurgents too strongly entrenched, the Canadians retreated to await the arrival of their heavy artillery. 

   As the week progressed, the situation for the insurgents became increasingly hopeless.  The Canadians had not risen in rebellion against their colonial government.  In fact, the very opposite was happening as hundreds joined their local militias to repulse this invasion.  Some of the Americans either escaped to the United States or were captured while trying to leave.  Many suffered from wounds incurred in the Tuesday battle.  The weather turned very cold. 

   Although the insurgents held their position for five days, no reinforcements came.  What was particularly frustrating for the hard-pressed American invading party throughout the week was to look across the river and see thousands of Americans, most of whom were sympathetic to the cause of "liberating" Canada from British rule, standing along the shorelines watching events unfold on the Canadian side. 

   On Friday afternoon, the British artillery began bombarding the American positions.  The insurgents began to either surrender or attempt to escape.  Von Schoultz himself was captured late Friday evening as he hid in bushes along the river bank. 

   Many of the battles fought in 1838 between American raiding parties and the British/Canadian forces were little more than bloody skirmishes lasting less than an hour.  The American invaders lacked the discipline of the British regular soldiers or the determination of Canadian militia members defending their own homes. 

   It is to von Schoultz's great credit as a military commander that the rag-tag fighting unit he led (some of whom were only 14 years old and none of whom had any real military experience) held out for five days in a desperate situation after sustaining heavy initial losses. 

   The prisoners spent one night in Fort Wellington.  They were then transferred by steamer to Kingston and the military prison at Fort Henry where the government held its courts-martial. 

   A young Kingston lawyer, John A. Macdonald, had been retained to give legal advice to one of the other prisoners.  Macdonald met von Schoultz at this time and gave him some legal advice for conducting his defence at his court-martial.  Von Schoultz insisted on pleading guilty. 

   At his court-martial, von Schoultz made a distinct impression on the British regular soldiers and others of his Canadian captors.  As leader of the insurgents, von Schoultz assumed all responsibility for the tragedy at Windmill Point.  He made no attempt to defend himself except to say he had treated his wounded prisoners well.  He never displayed any bitterness and refrained from censuring those who had let him down with promises of reinforcements. 

   A total of eleven of the prisoners were executed.  Sixty others were sent into exile to the penal colony of Van Dieman's Land (present-day Tasmania). 

   The first of the insurgents to hang was Nils von Schoultz.  As a mark of respect for his military background, von Schoultz was the only one of the eleven to be hanged and buried at Fort Henry. 

   Throughout the time of his capture until his execution, von Schoultz maintained his posture of being a former Polish officer.  It was perhaps essential that he continued to do so.  The fact that von Schoultz had a Scottish wife and that he had abandoned her and their children would hardly have improved his situation.  It would probably have dissipated the respect he had been able to create among his captors as an honourable, albeit misguided, lover of liberty. 

   For more than 130 years, Canadian and American historians regarded von Schoultz as the former Polish army officer he had portrayed himself to be.
 
  It was not until 1971, when Ella Pipping, von Schoultz's great-granddaughter, published a biography on her ancestor that historians learned that von Schoultz was actually a Finn by birth, a Swedish national and that, in fact, this "Polish" freedom-fighter had only spent some six months in Poland. 

   Macdonald drew up von Schoultz's will.  Money was left to the Roman Catholic college in Kingston and to families of the Canadian militiamen killed at the Windmill.  He wrote a last letter to friends in Salina.  There was, however, no last letter to his family in Sweden.  </I
  BRAVE NEW BALLET: ideas and athleticism shape an exciting work 

   New York City-born choreographer William Forsythe says that nothing would surprise him more in life than "no surprises."  And when the National Ballet of Canada presented the world premiere of his 25-minute work "the second detail" in Toronto last week, the surprises exploded in rapid succession.  The uniformly grey set, designed by Forsythe, was reminiscent of a rehearsal hall - but at one point, snow began falling inside it.  High above the grey-clad dancers' heads, a filmy white dress remained suspended in the air, attainable as a cloud, throughout the piece.  Meanwhile, the choreography, both cerebral and daringly athletic, provided surprises of its own.  Now 42 and the artistic director of Germany's Frankfurt Ballet, Forsythe has been hailed by critics as one of the most original interpreters of classical dance since George Balanchine, the Russian-born master of the mid-20th century. 

   Forsythe's decision to create a work for the National was a major honor for the Toronto-based company - and a welcome respite from the recessionary gloom that has been gathering around the troupe in recent months.  Earlier this year, artistic director Reid Anderson announced that as a cost-cutting measure, he would not renew the contracts of five company members, among them two principal dancers.  The company also cancelled plans to produce three ballets for a 1991 Mozart festival in Toronto.  National Ballet officials predict that, even with those cuts, the company's accumulated deficit will mount to $2 million by the end of the 1991-1992 season, up from the current $1.6 million. 

   Still, at last week's opening, the performers looked strong and adventurous.  Forsythe's distinctive vocabulary of angular, ferociously swift movements is already familiar to the company's dancers - his 1985 work, Steptext, entered the National's repertoire in 1989.  Like Steptext, the second detail applies a one word, risk-taking freedom to the diamond-hard precision of classical dance.  Forsythe, who used to dance the classics in New York's Joffrey Ballet, told Maclean's: "A lot of my stuff doesn't look like ballet, but only ballet dancers could do it." 

   In person, the lanky, freckled choreographer is a mixture of bubbly humor and intellectual adventurousness.  His enthusiasms range from dancing in the rap music videos ("M.C. Hammer is the greatest") to French deconstructionist Michel Foucault's Archeology of Knowledge ("a really groovy book").  The eclectic nature of his creativity is readily apparent in "the second detail".  For several minutes, a film of icebergs, underwear and other random images is projected onto a blank wall, competing with the dancers for attention.  The effect is distracting - but ultimately stimulating.  For everyone involved, a Forsythe ballet is an exhilarating workout.  </I

   EXISTENTIAL ACROBATICS: Robert Desrosiers choreographs a life 

   The best-known works of Toronto-based choreographer Robert Desrosiers have unfolded in a strange and spectacular dream world - a place where athletic dancers in elaborate, unearthly costumes cavort among the special effects.  In Blue Snake, the choreographer's 1985 commission for the National Ballet of Canada, a 30-foot-high giant's head gobbles up zebra-suited dancers.  Incognito, which the artist created for the 1988 Calgary Winter Olympics arts festival and revised in 1989, combines surreal imagery with high-tech trickery.  By comparison, his latest work for his own company is a surprisingly straightforward piece.  The hour Jeux (Games), which debuted last week at Toronto's Premiere Dance Theatre, is about the phases of human life from conception to the grave.  It is a production in which dance rather than spectacle is dominant.  Unfortunately, the absence of spectacle is all too conspicuous: on its own, Desrosiers's choreography proves to be only intermittently interesting. 

   Described by its 37-year-old choreographer as "a portrayal of the cyclical nature of our lives," Jeux begins with two lovers conceiving a child on a billowing sheet.  In an inventive scene change, the sheet becomes the wall of a womb, revealing Desrosiers as the fetus within.  He bursts through the sheet, simulating birth.  In the rest of the first act, members of the Premiere Dance Theatre and guest artists from the Canadian Children's Dance Theatre portray successive stages of life.  For most of Jeux's second act, titled "Life Carnival," the narrative disappears and the relationships among the dancers become abstract.  At the end, an old man totters onto the stage and dies, completing the life cycle. 

   Desrosiers's choreography is dynamic, and his dancers are, for the most part, equal to the punishingly acrobatic demands that he places on them.  But he relies heavily on a fairly limited range of swirling, churning movements that eventually seem repetitive.  Jeux's other major weakness is that the first and second acts bear little relation to each other; the finale with the old man seems on and fails to draw the two halves together.  Like the wizard of Oz, Robert Desrosiers looks disconcertingly human when he emerges from his arsenal of special effects.  </I

   Eloquent ambiguity 

   When Joanne Tod was a student at the Ontario College of Art in the early 1970s, painting was a decidedly unfashionable activity.  Making art with a video camera, or by arranging rocks on a gallery floor - that was fashionable.  And for those who felt compelled to paint, there was always abstract art.  But in her large canvases, which often addressed thorny social issues, Tod persisted in depicting subjects realistically.  Since the 1970s, such figurative painting has made a comeback - and Tod, now 38, is one of its most celebrated Canadian practitioners.  A major exhibition of her work opened recently at Toronto's Power Plant gallery, where it will be on view until Aug. 25.  It then travels to Saskatoon's Mendel Art Gallery (Sept. 20 to Nov. 3), the co-organizer of the show with the Power Plant, and to the Winnipeg Art Gallery (Nov. 29 to Feb. 16).  The artist says that she does not regret having been out of step in art school.  "It was a good experience because it put me in a position to be contrary," said Tod.  "I find it really interesting to put myself in opposition to other things." 

   What is clear from the show, which features 20 large paintings from the past decade, is that Tod's work simmers with opposition to sexism, racism and absolutist thinking.  Those topics have led many other artists into the mire of diatribe.  But Tod has confronted such issues with engaging originality and, on occasion, mordant humor.  Institutions including the National Gallery of Canada and the Vancouver Art Gallery have acquired her work.  And now she is starting to gain recognition abroad: in the fall, some of her paintings, which currently sell for between $15,000 and $35,000 each, will be part of a group show at the Thaddaeus Ropac Gallery in Paris.  Said Mendel curator Bruce Grenville, who put together the current show: "Anyone can be a flash in the pan, but Joanne has been producing very strong, articulate work for 10 years." 

   A vibrant, affable woman who rode her bicycle to a recent interview with Maclean's, Tod recalled that she began drawing and painting during her childhood.  Raised in Mississauga, Ont., she was the only child of computer technician Andrew Tod and his homemaker wife, Georgina Tod.  After graduating from the Ontario College of Art in 1974, Tod worked as an assistant in a private gallery for a number of years.  But since 1982, she has been able to devote herself to painting full time.  The artist now lives in downtown Toronto with Bob Becker, a musician with the award-winning percussion group Nexus. 

   While Tod's work has become more complex and less direct over the past decade, one constant has been her use of photographs as the basis for her paintings.  Self Portrait, a 1982 canvas that is perhaps her best-known work, is derived from a 1940s advertisement showing an elegant, formally gowned woman posing on a flight of steps beneath a night sky.  Calling the glamorous figure a self-portrait appears to be a simple act of fantasizing - except for one thing.  In yellow letters printed over the figure's dress are the words "beneath my arm is the color of Russell's Subaru."  That prosaic stray thought - it refers to the shade of a friend's car - stomps across the dreamy vision, challenging its outdated conception of ideal womanhood without entirely cancelling out the image's nostalgically romantic allure. 

   In 1983, Tod turned that painting into a picture within a picture with Self Portrait as Prostitute.  In the latter work, the earlier painting hangs on the wall of a tasteful dining room.  Clearly, the original work has become a commodity, something to be consumed along with dinner.  Tod now says that at that point in her career, she worried whether the need to sell paintings would cause her to compromise her work.  But since then, she adds, she has learned from feminism that "it's in my best interest to have the financial autonomy that selling paintings makes possible.  I haven't had to take jobs that would take away from my painting time.  As a result, I think my product has improved." 

   By the mid-1980s, Tod was dealing with race-related questions in her work.  The 1984 canvas A Diamond Is Forever shows a well-dressed elderly couple evidently posing for the camera in their own upper-class home - the woman's hand rests on a table in a proprietary fashion.  The picture would be a typical society portrait, except that the couple is black.  And that unexpected element forces viewers to confront their preconceptions about who belongs where in society. 

   For several years, Tod has been combining disparate, often perplexing images in her work, which on the whole has become more.  Tod says that Purple Heart, a massive (10 feet by 15 feet) 1989 composition, was inspired by the massacre in Beijing's Tiananmen Square two years ago.  In the painting, a pair of intricately carved Chinese panels frame a close-up of two traditionally decorated Chinese vases.  Incongruously, a vertical row of chevrons painted in a flat, abstract style bridges a gap between the two vases.  And diagonal smears of magenta paint deface the side panels. 

   Like much of Tod's work, the painting is a highly personal response to a larger event.  Said Tod, with reference to the smears: "Something that struck me was a news report about students throwing cans of paint at the official portraits of Mao."  She added that among her own early works had been a series of idealized Mao portraits.  The smears also recall the work of American abstract painter Morris Louis, while the chevrons allude to a shape repeatedly used by another, Kenneth Noland.  "In referring to those painters, I was referring back to my own education, and to when I made those Mao paintings with all this hope and idealism," said the artist.  She noted that the combination of the chevrons and the smears in Purple Heart also suggested a spinal column and a rib cage: "It anthropomorphizes the image and puts it back to the real thing that happened there - mass killing." 

   While it was Tod's contempt for a repressive political regime that inspired Purple Heart, she opposes absolutism in all of its lesser guises as well.  In particular, she balks at the kind of art that screams out its message without allowing any room for dissent or ambiguity.  "I have gone through a really vehement political phase," she said, "but I never felt I was trying to be didactic in the sense of saying 'This is how I feel and this is what is right and this is what you should feel, too.' "  Combining passionate commitment and a questioning intelligence, Joanne Tod has a knack for probing unsettling issues.  </I

   A DECADE THAT ROARED: a Montreal show explores the manic 1920s 

   Perhaps more than any decade this century, the 1920s were years of social flux and artistic frenzy.  The desolation of the First World War gave way to the machine age - and an acceleration in all aspects of life.  It was the era of sprouting skyscrapers and Charles Lindberg's historic transatlantic flight.  In the smoke-filled cabarets of Berlin, the crowded cafes of Paris and the steamy nightclubs of New York City, there was a frantic burst of creative energy.  A number of artists provided glimpses of the technological future: German film-maker Fritz Lang's Metropolis (1926) and French painter Fernand Leger's industrial paintings visualized the "robot," a word coined in 1921.  </I
  A SPECIAL SPIRIT: Jack Shadbolt combines intellect and passion 

   The people in the lineup moved slowly towards the elderly man seated at a table at Calgary's Glenbow Museum.  Surrounded by 100 works collected for the first retrospective of his career since 1969, Vancouver artist Jack Shadbolt, 82, cheerfully signed exhibition posters and catalogues.  An art student told Shadbolt that she liked his 1977 collage of 46 brightly colored butterflies entitled Homage to Vladimir II, a tribute to author-lepidopterist Vladimir Nabokov.  "They are an odd lot," he told her as he scrawled his name across the poster, a detail of his 1978 landscape Wild Grass Suite.  "I used bits of pictures from a bundle of fashion magazines.  I knew fabrics because my mother was a dressmaker and used me as a clotheshorse."  After more than six decades as an artist and influential teacher, the dressmaker's son is now a revered senior statesman of domestic art.  Said the retrospective's curator, Patricia Ainslie, the Glenbow's curator of art: "He is central to western Canadian art and was of major significance nationally in the 1950s and 1960s to Canadian art." 

   The Calgary show, called Correspondences: Jack Shadbolt, makes clear that its subject is an artist of both intellect and passion, a restless creator who has mastered a wide variety of styles.  The retrospective will remain on view in Calgary until Jan. 5 before it travels next summer to Vancouver, and then on to the Art Gallery of Windsor in Ontario and the National Gallery in Ottawa.  The show traces Shadbolt's introduction to, and assimilation of, styles including social realism, surrealism and abstractionism.  Along the way, he found inspiration in such artists as Emily Carr, Edvard Munch, Paul Cezanne, Pablo Picasso and Diego Rivera.  Yet the retrospective also demonstrates that early on, Shadbolt forged his own esthetic - a vibrant, sensual and urgent approach to his subject matter, which has often included native mythology, and nature and its destruction.  Said the artist in an interview with Maclean's: "You don't just copy other artists - you move alongside to see if what they do can contribute to your own resources." 

   Shadbolt's rise to prominence - and financial success - was slow.  "I sold no pictures for many years," he said in an address to mark the Glenbow retrospective opening on Nov. 2.  "Then, in the 1960s, I got a Canada Council grant.  Then another.  One award leads to another.  I got the Order of Canada.  Gradually, I became known as one of those western intellectuals who counted."  Now, a commercial Shadbolt exhibition stirs collectors to a frenzy.  Last February at Vancouver's Bau-Xi Gallery, buyers began lining up more than 24 hours in advance for a show of recent works by the artist.  Within 15 minutes, 23 of the 28 paintings were sold.  A small Shadbolt work sells for about $6,000, while his larger paintings command between $30,000 and $50,000. 

   Shadbolt recalls that as a boy, he planned a career in commercial art.  Born in Essex, England, in 1909, Jack Leonard Shadbolt was the second of five children born to sign painter and paperhanger Edmund Shadbolt and his wife, Alice.  Jack was 3 when his parents moved to British Columbia, where they eventually settled in Victoria.  In his late teens, he committed himself to fine art and to teaching. 

   Over the years, Shadbolt taught art in a number of high schools, moving in 1938 to the Vancouver School of Art, where he worked off and on for 28 years, becoming a valued and influential instructor.  He also travelled, working and studying in Toronto, New York City and Europe.  During the Second World War, Shadbolt served in London as an administrative officer for the Official Canadian Army War Artists Programme.  One of his duties was to file and catalogue photographs that advancing Allied soldiers had taken of the Buchenwald and Belsen concentration camps.  The war was a sobering lesson in human brutality, inspiring such bleak works as Dog Among the Ruins (1947) and Bird Image (1948).  But Shadbolt says that it also helped him to understand abstract art.  "A bomb hits a building, blows it up and then, in memory, the pieces fall back together for an image of what it used to be," he said.  "It is dismemberment and reassembly." 

   In 1945, Shadbolt returned to Vancouver to work and teach.  That year, he married Ottawa resident Doris Meisel, who went on to become an influential critic and art curator (they have no children).  Back in Canada, Shadbolt refined his artistic vision, cultivating the West Coast influences that recur throughout his work.  Many of his drawings and paintings echo the work of Carr, who had the young Shadbolt to afternoon teas in the 1930s.  The Winter Barns (1936) is a moody, Carr-like evocation of a rustic scene.  And Shadbolt pays explicit tribute to his mentor in the 1968 charcoal work Hornby Suite (Homage to Emily Carr), a brooding landscape. 

   Shadbolt's mature work shows him to be a quintessentially West Coast painter, immersed in the land and native mythologies of British Columbia.  Said Xisa Huang, owner of the Bau-Xi galleries in Vancouver and Toronto, which have represented Shadbolt for two decades: "He made his choice long ago to live and interpret things from a western Canadian perspective.  He is in touch with the special spirit of the West Coast."  But the artist also suffuses his works with a more universal, psychological resonance, as in Night Fears (Fetish Series #12), a 1970 painting incorporating Inuit imagery, and in the surrealistic Darkening Foreshore (1989). 

   Huang adds that Shadbolt's failure to penetrate the international market is not a major concern for the artist.  "He could have, but that isn't what interests him," said the Bau-Xi owner. "Instead, he is extremely interested in art and his own community."  Indeed, in 1988, Shadbolt and his wife set up the Vancouver Institute for the Visual Arts, a foundation that offers financial support to young artists. 

   Huang says that Shadbolt is as prolific as ever.  The artist's current studio works will be exhibited next February in Vancouver and Toronto and, noted Huang, "they will be abstract and full of energy.  He is still pushing." 

   Throughout his career, Shadbolt has grappled with, in his words, "reconciling nature with abstraction, and deliberation with intuition."  His art derives much of its power from that duality - its appeal to both heart and mind.  And Shadbolt continues to address those issues with an intense commitment.  "In growing older," says the artist in the retrospective catalogue, "it is simply that the problem becomes less how to paint than what to paint; to become concerned with a statement of authentic response to the complexity of life."  In his art, Jack Shadbolt makes that complexity both pleasurable and provocative.  </I

   STRIKING ORIGINALS: celebrating a Group of Seven contemporary 

   Ontario-born artist David Milne had strikingly simple desires.  He once wrote that having "hills to sit on while painting other hills" ranked high on his wish list.  Primarily a landscape painter, Milne, who died in 1953 at age 71, led a life that was hill-rich but cash-poor.  In 1934, while living in a tar-paper shack near Georgian Bay, he attempted to sell his entire body of work, approximately 1,000 pictures, to Vincent Massey and his wife, Alice.  Asking price: $5 apiece.  The future governor general and his wife did in fact buy 300 of them at that humble rate.  More recently, however, one of Milne's paintings sold for $85,800.  And last week, the largest retrospective ever of Milne's eloquent and original work opened at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection in Kleinburg, Ont., 30 km northwest of Toronto. 

   The 155-piece show, which travels in January to the Vancouver Art Gallery, co-organizer of the exhibition, and then in July to the National Gallery in Ottawa, seems likely to consolidate the reputation of a long-undervalued artist.  Funded by Trimark Investment Management Inc., Amex Bank of Canada and The Financial Post, the $1-million show includes watercolors, oil paintings and prints from major public galleries and private collections.  Said the retrospective's curator, Ian Thom: "He remains for me an endlessly fascinating artist."  Added Thom, formerly on the McMichael staff and now a senior curator at the Vancouver Art Gallery: "In his pictures, he was constantly challenging himself and doing the unexpected." 

   But Milne has always remained in the shadow of his famous contemporaries, Tom Thomson and the Group of Seven.  His own approach to landscape was very different from theirs - or anyone else's, for that matter.  While their bold canvases tend to celebrate nature in its full resplendence, Milne's art has a wintry, introspective quality, an intensity rooted in restraint.  Partly because of the smallness of his pictures - many of them are no bigger than a place mat - they have brought relatively modest sums at auction.  The record price for a Milne was set in Toronto in 1987, when the oil painting Temagami from Above the Railroad sold for $78,000, plus the auction house's premium of $7,800.  (Emily Carr's works of similar size have sold for comparable sums; some Group of Seven oil paintings have sold for more than $500,000.)  Milne's art never shouts to be heard - but, as Thom told Maclean's, "if you really take the time to look at it, you will be rewarded." 

   Early in life, Milne learned to work hard and live frugally.  Raised in Paisley, Ont., 180 km northwest of Toronto, he was the youngest of 10 children.  His parents, both Scottish immigrants, barely managed to support the family by running a home laundry and selling produce from their garden.  As a young man, Milne taught school for three years in Paisley and saved his money.  In 1903, after borrowing additional funds from one of his brothers, he moved to New York City to attend art school.  After three years of study at the Art Students League, he remained in the city, eking out an existence as a commercial artist. 

   All the time that he was painting signs and illustrating magazines, he continued to work at his own painting.  By frequenting the most progressive galleries, Milne came into contact with the work of such influential French artists as Georges Seurat and Henri Matisse.  Soon, his own work, which relied on the bright colors and animated brushwork that Postimpressionism had popularized, was gaining critical acclaim.  Five of his pictures were included in the 1913 International Exhibition of Modern Art, a shock-of-the-new collection that enraged art-world conservatives and went down in history as the Armory Show, a reference to the building in which it was held. 

   But at the same time that he was gaining recognition, the diffident and contemplative artist was restless in the city.  He wanted to move somewhere less expensive in order to abandon the time-consuming commercial work and focus wholly on his art.  In 1916, Milne and his wife - he had married a New Yorker, bookkeeper May (Patsy) Hegarty, in 1912 - moved to Boston Corners, a village in the hills of Upstate New York.  By the time he left the city, he had begun to develop his distinctive preference for subdued colors, applied so sparingly that areas of unpainted background showed through.  It was in Boston Corners, however, that he truly came into his own as an artist. 

   A pencil-and-watercolor work from his first year here, Bishop's Pond, provides stunning evidence of Milne's gift for capturing contrasting textures.  While the trees on the shore are scratchily depicted, the artist gave their reflections a fluid look by brushing a watercolor wash over the pond - a beautifully simple idea, and one that is entirely consistent with Milne's philosophical approach to his art.  He once described his pictures as "simplifications of line and color intended to produce a thrill, a kick."  An artist, he also wrote, "doesn't try to reproduce the thing before him: he simplifies and eliminates until he knows exactly what stirred him." 

   Milne's Boston Corners years were interrupted by service as an official Canadian war artist in 1918 and 1919.  The current retrospective contains an artistically and historically fascinating sampling of the paintings he executed in England near the end of the First World War, and in France soon after the fighting had ceased.  Better at portraying stark stillness than human figures in motion, Milne's most effective work depicted the war's desolate aftermath in such places as Vimy Ridge.  "I never could quite decide if I was the last soldier of the first tourist," he wrote with characteristic wryness, "but it was thrilling."  </I
  INFLAMMATORY SHOWS: Derek Goldby delights in provoking audiences 

   The current economic downturn does not seem to be hurting Derek Goldby.  While many of his fellow freelance theatre directors wait by the telephone, Goldby just keeps on working.  He recently took his eccentric and highly popular version of Moliere's Tartuffe from Theatre Calgary to the Canadian Stage Company in Toronto, where it runs until Oct. 26.  Meanwhile, he has staged an off-Broadway production of Edmonton playwright Brad Fraser's Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love.  The 50ish Goldby is also preparing Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard for Toronto's Tarragon Theatre, where it will run from Nov. 5 to Dec. 15.  In the midst of all that activity, he and Canadian Stage artistic director Bob Baker are discussing the possibility of opening a school for Canadian actors. 

   Goldby is busy for the simple reason that he is considered to be one of the country's best directors.  Born in Australia and raised in Britain - he immigrated to Canada in 1976 - he is also reputed to be arrogant and hard to please.  Goldby, who works frequently in the United States and Britain, is openly critical of Canada's theatre culture.  "You cannot really become a star in Canada, you cannot reach a point where you are held in real esteem," he said in an interview.  As a result, he added, the country tends to produce "middle-of-the-road, safe actors, instead of actors who take risks.  If you go to Stratford, you'll see some jolly good respectable acting.  But you won't see anybody burning up the scenery." 

   Goldby's best productions - including last year's vibrant The Importance of Being Earnest by Oscar Wilde (for the Canadian Stage) and his gripping version of August Strindberg's psychodrama The Father (for the Tarragon) - have often set the scenery smoking.  He has a talent for giving a new, often disturbing edge to classic plays.  He has transformed that pompous religious hypocrite Tartuffe, played by Brent Carver, from a 17th-century French Catholic into a contemporary evangelist in the Jim Bakker mould.  He speaks with a southern drawl, and in the famous seduction scene - in which the supposedly pious Tartuffe makes torrid advances on a married woman - he wears outrageous black leather pants with no bottom in them.  The approach works - at times brilliantly.  When Tartuffe's hypocrisy is finally exposed, Carver screams out his hatred while grovelling on a floor that Goldby has covered with peat moss.  Rarely has the sheer animality underlying Tartuffe's pretences been so powerfully exposed. 

   Meanwhile, the critical response in New York City to Goldby's Human Remains, now in an indefinite run at the 350-seat Orpheum Theatre, has been mixed.  But so far, audiences are flocking to see it.  As Goldby points out, "The play is going to be much more tested in New York than it was in Toronto [where director Jim Millan's production ran for a total of four months in two separate theatres].  In Toronto, a six-week run is a big success.  But in New York, it has to go for six months or a year - in a much bigger theatre - before you can call it a hit." 

   Goldby travels frequently to Britain, New York and his small holiday house in Morocco.  But he keeps returning to Canada, and particularly to Toronto.  He describes the city as "restful" - a state which his inflammatory productions seem determined to change.  </I

   PRIDE AND REMORSE: an old woman grieves her way to self-forgiveness 

  THE STONE ANGEL 

  Adapted by James W. Nichol
  Directed by Brian Richmond

   Hagar Shipley, the most prominent old woman in English-Canadian fiction, has taken to the stage.  Played by Barbara Chilcott, the embattled heroine of Margaret Laurence's novel The Stone Angel appears in a new theatrical version that opened this summer at Ontario's Blyth Festival and is now running until Oct. 6 at Toronto's Theatre Passe Muraille.  Finding a dramatic equivalent for the interior monologues and shifting perspectives of fiction is always difficult.  But in adapting The Stone Angel, playwright James W. Nichol has given Hagar a credible second life.  If she fails to fully satisfy, the fault is less with Passe Muraille's production than with the novel itself. 

   The play closely follows the book, which was written in 1964, 23 years before Laurence died.  It begins and ends with Hagar dying - while she reminisces about her failed life.  Hagar's problem is that she has too much pride.  It has ruined her marriage to Prairie farmer Bram Shipley (Thomas Hauff) and destroyed the life of her favorite son, John (Elliot Smith), whom she schemed to separate from his lover, Arlene (Allegra Fulton).  Fortunately, she grieves over her errors before she dies and so achieves a measure of self-forgiveness. 

   Director Brian Richmond seamlessly manages Hagar's movement in and out of her past.  Chilcott's transitions to girlhood are particularly affecting.  When Hagar's father (Alan Williams) punishes her by striking her with a ruler, Hagar's entire life is summed up by her brave but somehow inhuman refusal to cry. 

   Yet the play cannot escape the gothic sentimentality of the novel.  Most of Laurence's characters are caricatures, and not very original ones.  Hagar herself is a stereotype of the ranting, indomitable granny, familiar from countless pioneer epics - an impression underlined by Chilcott's brassy-voiced delivery, which glosses over the true fragility and terror of old age.  Despite much excellent acting from the supporting cast, The Stone Angel seems naive and old-fashioned.  Although there is human truth at the core of the production, it lacks the biting originality of the best theatre.  </I

   TRIUMPH IN EDMONTON: Lloyd Webber's latest work reaches Canada 

   Its producers say that it is the most popular show ever mounted on an Edmonton stage.  Nearly every day, they receive about 1,000 orders for tickets to Andrew Lloyd Webber's Aspects of Love, which started a seven-week run at the Citadel Theatre on Sept. 4.  By last week, the box office had already reached break-even point on the $3.2-million production, after selling about three-quarters of the 40,000 seats available.  To have secured the rights to Aspects in the first place was a major triumph for the Citadel and its director general, Robin Phillips.  And Lloyd Webber, who attended the opening-night performance at the Citadel's 685-seat Shoctor Theatre, applauded the Edmonton version, which moves to Toronto for a limited run beginning on Dec. 3.  Attending a gala reception following the performance, the composer told Maclean's: "It is so thrilling to have a new production."  Added the diminutive multimillionaire Englishman, creator of such musical extravaganzas as Cats and Phantom of the Opera: "It worked so well." 

   For the 43-year-old Lloyd Webber, one of the century's dominant theatrical composers with at least 13 productions of his musicals currently playing around the world, it was a chance to breathe new life into one of his less successful works.  Certainly, Phillips, 49, who became the Citadel's director general last year after a high-profile career that included six years as artistic director of southern Ontario's Stratford Festival, has managed to reinvigorate Aspects by giving it a tighter story line.  The musical first opened in London in 1989, where it is still running, but the New York City production closed in 1991 after a 10-month run.  It lacks the stage hydraulics and blockbuster antics of Lloyd Webber's other hits.  But Phillips's talented international cast (none of the leads is Canadian), which includes veteran Australian-born Shakespearean actor Keith Mitchell, endows the production with passion. 

   Based on a 1955 novella by David Garnett, who was on the periphery of Britain's famed Bloomsbury Group, the musical touches on the entanglements among five people over three generations.  As it opens, the focus is on 17-year-old London theatre fan Alex (American Ron Bohmer), who takes Rose (American Linda Balgord), an impoverished, older Parisian actress, to the retreat of his wealthy uncle George (Mitchell) in the south of France.  George is away from the idyllic seaside villa, and the lovers help themselves to his bed and his brandy.  "I feel 17 again," sings Rose.  "So do I," rejoins Alex, moments before George returns - to fall in love with, and ultimately marry, Rose.  Over the years, the sybaritic George, whose solution to life's problems is a glass of champagne, has other romantic interests - including Italian sculptress Giulietta (American Kelli James).  Meanwhile, Rose becomes a leading actress and plumbs other aspects of love in a brief liaison with Giulietta and nostalgic flings with Alex.  Eventually, George falls on hard times financially and immerses himself in paternal love for his daughter, Jenny, played by Toronto actresses Miranda de Pencier as the younger child and Lori Alter as the teenager.  And, in a further convolution, when Jenny grows up she becomes enamored of her cousin Alex. 

   Phillips's control of the rebuilt musical is evident: the story is more lucid than it was in the New York version.  And the director's use of just one set, which transforms almost imperceptibly from Parisian bar to train to villa through a series of subtle lighting changes, serves to highlight the music itself.  "I used the set to open up Andrew's own colossal score," Phillips said in an interview.  "It is one of his best - intricate, deep and varied and searingly accurate about the pain and pleasures of love." 

   The production afforded Phillips an opportunity to link the nonprofit Citadel with the high-stakes world of international theatre.  "There is a terrific opportunity for a Canadian circuit for this type of show," he said.  "We must come up with new ways to present theatre, especially now that government funding is not the greatest."  Aspects was co-produced by the Citadel in partnership with the Toronto-based Live Entertainment Corp. of Canada, which produced Phantom in Canada, and with Lloyd Webber's London-based Really Useful Theatre Co. Ltd., which also staged the New York version.  "This production comes out of Western Canada," said Live Entertainment chairman Garth Drabinsky, who negotiated with Webber's company to secure the Canadian rights.  "There is a vital implication here for all commercial theatres that private and nonprofit sectors can fuse successfully on projects." 

   The brisk sales for Aspects are a welcome development for Phillips, whose first full season at the theatre also includes the Shakespearean favorite Romeo and Juliet and the premiere of Calgary playwright John Murrell's Democracy, about the American Civil War.  But Citadel insiders say that many intangible benefits will also flow from attracting a big production by Lloyd Webber.  And the composer himself, who praised the Citadel as a "wonderful theatre space," said that he is anxious to stage another show there.  Vowed Lloyd Webber: "We'll do it again."  </I

   HISTORY AS DRAMA: Sir Wilfrid Laurier haunts a playwright 

   For a moment near the end of Laurier, a ghostly presence electrifies the stage at Toronto's Theatre Passe Muraille.  Dressed and made up to look like Sir Wilfrid Laurier, one of Canada's greatest prime ministers, Stephen Ouimette moves out of a spotlight and appears in vivid silhouette.  For a magical instant, his resemblance to Laurier - with the high forehead and flyaway hair so familiar from the $5 bill - transcends mere imitation.  It is as if the ghost of the dead politician had been caught in the act of manipulating events on stage.  The best of Laurier has that kind of urgency.  The fifth instalment of Toronto playwright Michael Hollingsworth's epic dramatization of Canada, The History of the Village of the Small Huts, the play examines issues of Laurier's time that are of pressing concern now: Quebec's place in Confederation and the question of what it means to be Canadian. 

   Hollingsworth, 41, claims that post-Meech Lake anxiety helped transform his play, which runs until July 21.  In a recent interview, he told Maclean's that he had originally intended to write a farce about Edwardian Canada.  But then, the constitutional crisis compelled him to explore Laurier's story more deeply.  He discovered that Laurier - who was prime minister from 1896 to 1911 - played a major role in shaping contemporary Canada.  "We tend to think that it's institutions and social movements that change the nature of the country," he said.  "But it's these wild, wired individuals who make things happen."  Added Hollingsworth: "Just look at Mulroney.  He promised he'd make Canada unrecognizable - and he has." 

   In his dark glasses and black vest, Hollingsworth exudes the tough-guy air of a gambler who tells it like it is.  He argues that if Laurier came back now and saw the predicament Canada is in, "he'd be so grossed out he'd be speechless."  In Hollingswoth's view, Laurier's greatest accomplishment was to transcend the forces of racial and religious divisiveness that have always threatened to tear Canada apart.  "Laurier defined Canada as a multinational state that believes in liberty," he said.  </I
   Preaching with Samir  
  ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT
  A REPORT BY GORDON NICKEL

   In the midst of sharing God's Word at a Baptist retreat on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria, Egypt, I had to ask myself once more what I had ever done to deserve this privilege.  Beside me, my enthusiastic translator, a veterinarian from Assiut, rendered my English into a melodious Arabic.  The Baptist young people sitting before me accepted the words they were hearing as God's message for them.  Through my northern European eyes, these Egyptian Arab evangelicals looked very attractive.  I felt it an honour to have them welcome me, a stranger, into their fellowship - never mind to have them invite me to preach! 

   Of course, I had done nothing to deserve the privilege, and that came back to me again and again as I enjoyed a nine-day visit to Egypt in August, 1995.  The entire trip was arranged by Samir Youssef, a Mennonite Brethren who pastors the Arabic Evangelical Church in New Westminster, B.C.  He had lived most of his life in Egypt, and only a few years ago immigrated to Canada with his wife Lewiza and sons David and Martin. 

   Samir had come to Egypt several weeks earlier and had arranged the schedule for us ahead of time.  My son Matthew and I arrived August 21.  We were on our way back from Pakistan, where we had worked for three weeks together with MB Missions/Services workers Tim and Janine Bergdahl in witness to the Baluch people in Karachi. 

   Samir met us at the Cairo airport and took us straight to the city of El-Fayyoum, where he was preaching in a Free Methodist church.  After two evenings there, we overnighted back to Cairo for a meeting in a lively church on the poor side of town.  Then we took the train to Upper Egypt for three days in Assemblies of God and Presbyterian churches in Assiut and Tema.  Finally we overnighted to Alexandria, for this Baptist retreat and for revival meetings in another Free Methodist church. 

   The Christians welcomed Matthew and me because they knew Samir.  Samir has many friends in Egypt through his earlier ministry as a pastor there.  His father was a famous pastor and leader in the Presbyterian Church in Egypt.  I saw that Samir is greatly loved by a wide variety of Christians in Egypt, and seemed to know just about everyone.  He is a fine evangelist and revival preacher, and it was great to see him in action.  Samir sings songs which inspire the people; when he preaches, he seems to have everyone in the palm of his hand with humour and emotional appeals, all the time taking full advantage of the beauty and rhythm of the Arabic language. 

   We met several former professionals who are now in full-time ministry because of Samir's encouragement.  When I talked with various evangelical church leaders, I was impressed with their strength of character and their competence in ministry.  Though they spoke in a very realistic way about the difficulties of being Christians in an extremist environment, they did not complain but rather testified that God is blessing the church.  During our days in Egypt, I saw a variety of very solid ministries done by the evangelical churches, including Christian education, radio witness and follow-up, development of discipleship materials, and compassionate ministries such as a large orphanage in Assiut. 

   Samir and I were glad to represent the Mennonite Brethren in Egypt, and during his stay Samir handed out to his church leader friends about 1000 copies of the Mennonite Brethren Confession of Faith.  When Samir had first accepted the MB Confession and joined the MB church, he had translated the Confession into Arabic.  The booklet he passed out in Egypt was thus "bilingual". 

   Church leaders read through the Confession and responded in thoughtful, interesting ways.  On one occasion, I was conversing with two young Baptist pastors, and told them that Mennonites have traditionally not participated in war or even in military training. 

   The pastors asked, "Do you still not participate in military training?" 

   "No, we still do not participate," Samir answered for us.  This is no insignificant point for Egyptian men, who are required by law to take two years of military training. 

   Preaching 11 times in eight days did not leave a lot of time for the sightseeing we wanted to do.  But Matthew and I were able to see the Sphinx and the Great Pyramid at Giza, and we spent an afternoon at a resort beside Lake Qaroun near El-Fayyoum.  Later on in the trip, we were able to do a bit of shopping in Alexandria and take a dip in the blue-green waters of the Mediterranean there. 

   On the last day of our time together, sitting in the living room of Samir's mother's apartment in Alexandria with a pleasant breeze blowing in through the open balcony doors, we reflected on the possibilities of European-background Mennonite Brethren and Arabic Mennonite Brethren doing something together in the Middle East. 

   "There are millions of people who need a ministry in Egypt," we agreed. "Our goal is to bring people to Jesus Christ.  We stand for a Believers' Church." 

   Samir and many Egyptian evangelicals have a special burden for members of the Orthodox Coptic Church who do not yet have the joy of knowing Jesus Christ.  When they speak of "evangelism", they normally have these people in mind. 

   Mennonite Brethren Missions/Services, on the other hand, has a desire to expand its gospel witness among Muslims, the religious group which makes up the majority of Egypt's population.  It was clear from our explorations that this kind of witness would only be possible through local Egyptian Christians themselves. 

   Considering an entry into a new region raises important questions about how we relate to local churches.  The Orthodox Coptic Church, for example, goes back to the time of the early church, and it has been faithful through nearly 1350 years of Muslim rule.  Another crucial question is how MB initiatives might relate to the established work of Mennonite agencies in the region, such as Mennonite Central Committee. 

   Samir and I didn't have the authority to make decisions in any case; we were only there to explore.  But that didn't stop us from dreaming together.  When Arabic Mennonite Brethren open up windows for us into a region where we have not yet worked as a church, might these not at some point become doors of opportunity?  It wouldn't be the first time that our non-European MB fellowships have led us into privileges of ministry which we've done nothing to deserve.  - Gordon Nickel, an instructor at Bethany Bible Institute in Hepburn, Sask. and an MBM/S consultant on outreach to Muslims.   </I

    AIDS crisis imperils Botswana; MBM/S missionaries call for prayer  
  BOTSWANA

   MBM/S missionaries in Botswana, Bryan and Teresa Born, have issued an urgent plea for prayer in September for the AIDS-decimated population of Botswana.  The country has the highest rate of HIV infection in the world.  (HIV is the virus which develops into AIDS, eventually resulting in death.) 

   In August, the Borns attended a gathering of ministers and health officials where the grim statistics, say the Borns, "broke our hearts and brought us to our knees."  The numbers are staggering; they represent a horrendous toll of human suffering, grief and death that threaten to wipe out Botswanan society. 

   50% of the students at the University of Botswana - the only university in the country - are HIV+.  Barring a major medical break-through, almost all the infected will die in 5-10 years. 

   In the major towns and cities, 40% of pregnant women test positive for AIDS; many of the children will be born under a sentence of death. 

   25% of all persons over 15 are infected.  Researchers fear that the figure will double in four years. 

   CHRISTIANS MOBILIZE  

   At the August meetings, the concerned Christians declared September a month of prayer and repentance.  Churches are being challenged to follow the pattern prescribed in II Chronicles 7:14: "If my people, who are called by my name, will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land." 

   Along with the call for national repentance, special events will be organized in major towns and villages.  Workshops will train the healthy "to take care of the sick and dying, as well as help the grieving," say the Borns. 

   PRESIDENT TO PROMOTE MORALITY  

   The president of Botswana, Sir Keitumile Masire, will open the educational campaign on September 1 with a speech decrying rampant sexual promiscuity and embracing "the biblical principles of abstinence before marriage and absolute faithfulness within marriage" . 

   Meanwhile, the Borns need fresh energizing from the Holy Spirit. 

   "We feel the battle," they write, "and at times we're exhausted and discouraged.  Please pray for us; this is a battle for the hearts souls and lives of this people."  North American Mennonite Brethren are urged to join the prayer crusade and write a note of encouragement to Bryan and Teresa Born, Box 10789, Selebi Phikwe, Botswana.  - Gary Hardaway   </I

    Mission adventure for Zaire Mennonite conferences  

   For many years Zaire Mennonite conferences concentrated most of their outreach efforts in Kinshasa, Bandundu and Kasai provinces.  In 1994, with the outbreak of ethnic conflicts in Rwanda, attention turned to eastern Zaire, first with humanitarian assistance and now for church planting in Bukavu, near the Great Lakes Region. 

   The three Mennonite conferences in Zaire, in collaboration with their partners, Mennonite Brethren Missions/Services, Africa Independent Mennonite Missions and Mennonite Central Committee are sending two couples into the region.  In affirmation, the MBM/S Board has allocated $5,200 to share in this partnership. 

   Two features of the Great Lakes Project are especially noteworthy. 

   1. The excellent advance work of two lay leadership couples already involved in organizing a local congregation.
  Fidel and Christa Lumeya were sent by MCC to work in the area as coordinator of MCC program in the region.  Before going to Bukavu, they were very involved in Kinshasa church life of the Zaire MB conference.
  Dr. and Mrs. Kalumuna were involved in a congregation in Kinshasa.  This tent-making couple went to Bukavu with the blessing and financial assistance from their congregation and with the hope of planting a church. 

   Thanks to these two couples, a local international congregation has fully organized in Bukavu with 50 people meeting each Sunday for worship.  A congregational Bible study meets each Friday evening. 

   2. Mission Training Through Local Structure.  In addition, two Mennonite pastor couples are getting ready to be sent to Bukavu as the first missionaries to the region.  Before starting, both couples are immersed in a nine-week training program especially designed for them by the International Missiology Center run by Dr. Nzash Lumeya.  Courses include Anabaptist history, history of the Great Lakes region, history of African religions, cultural anthropology, biblical theology of mission, conflict resolution, cross-cultural communication, personality studies, church administration and group dynamics. 

   "We praise God for the work being started in this region," declares MBM/S Regional Secretary for Africa, Pakisa Tshimika.  "The long term goal is to reach out not only to eastern Zaire but also to Rwanda and Burundi."  The organizers ask prayer support for: 
  local lay leaders involved in the young international congregation: Dr. and Mrs. Kalumuna; Christa and Fidel Lumeya; Mr. and Mrs. Tshihuluka; Brothers Francois, Namuira, Nyamulinduka and Ange. 
  involvement of Zairian and other leaders as resources in leadership training 
  patience, wisdom and endurance for the two couples being trained 
  availability of funds as promised by conferences and partners 
  peace and tranquillity in the region.  - Gary Hardaway   </I

    New Order Mennonites  
  John H. REDEKOP
   During the 26 years I lived in Waterloo County, Ontario, the Old Order Mennonites were a constant source of fascination, at times also of inspiration, and occasionally of disappointment.  The fascination related to their dogged determination to retain a distinctive and very old-fashioned lifestyle.  The inspiration arose from their insistence on being a separate, peaceful people who practised authentic simplicity and mutual assistance, and avoided all forms of vengeance.  The disappointment pertained to their preoccupation with externalities, especially dress codes, their rejection of compromise on non-essentials of the gospel, their adamant insistence on conformity, their apparent indifference to the Great Commission, and their general legalism.  </I
   THE REEL THING  
  Could the modern evils of TV and rock 'n' roll kill the vintage art of Celtic fiddling?  Not in Cape Breton, boys.  Now get yourself up on that floor, and let's have a go! 
  Article by ALFRED LEBLANC
  Photography by PATRICE HALLEY 

   The Saturday square dances in West Mabou, on the southwest coast of Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, would be enough to make poor old Father Kenneth MacDonald turn over in his grave.  A century ago, the local priest fought to stamp out fiddle music for its devilish influence.  Judging from the action tonight in this community hall, the music still has the power to possess. 

   As fiddler Kinnon Beaton powers into Michael Rankin's Reel, a yelp of glee comes from the floor.  "It's a sin to miss a dance," says 70-year-old Donnie MacDougall from nearby Inverness, pouring sweat from the last set.  "I'm at every dance, and I never miss a set."  In the third figure of the square set, the men and women peel away from each other, forming facing lines the length of the hall.  Then there's the swoosh and tap of shoes on worn plywood as partners stepdance back to each other.  After the set, the dancers clear space for Margie and Dawn Beaton, 9- and 12-year-old sisters from Mabou, to show off their steps.  They finish to a loud cheer and give way to 22-year-old Rodney MacDonald, who dances to spirited versions of Miss Lyle, Dail in the Kitchen, and other classic strathspeys and reels.  After a little coaxing, even 50-year-old Alex Hughie MacDonald from Judique gets up and has a go. 

   Traditional Celtic-style fiddling, piping, and stepdancing are thriving arts in Cape Breton.  In the summers, there are hundreds of square dances, concerts, and ceilidhs (parties) scattered about the island.  The Ceilidh Trail, running along the west coast, likely boasts more musicians per capita than anywhere else in Canada.  It is a rich cultural soil that has nurtured such musical greats as The Rankin Family, recent winners of four Juno awards, and 19-year-old Ashley MacIsaac, an innovative young fiddler just starting a recording career that could push the Cape Breton sound onto the world stage and into the 21st century.  So strong is the local tradition that the island's musicians are often invited to give workshops in Scotland to coach the founders in their own lost arts. 

 

   For every Cape Breton star who travels the world, there are dozens more musicians who stay home to play a vital role in local life.  To an area that has been economically depressed for generations, the Cape Breton fiddler brings self-forgetting joy.  The unique driving pulse of the music leads irresistibly to the dance, which sets spirits free.  "We live in the dark ages," says Patsi Palmer, who fell in love with Cape Breton's music and life and moved here from upstate New York.  "This music cheers people up.  This music is the doctor." 

   Cape Breton's Celtic music has a long history - and a resilient spirit that has seen it through some rough times.  Many of the tunes played by a fiddler such as 38-year-old Kinnon Beaton were imported by his forefathers when they first came from Scotland to Cape Breton during the Highland Clearances (the forced expulsion of sharecroppers) in the early 1800s, then passed down through the generations.  (Beaton's grandfather, Angus Ronald, and father, Donald Angus, were both great fiddlers.)  But during Beaton's own youth, fiddling became unfashionable.  As I witnessed myself while growing up in the late 1960s and early 1970s in Margaree Forks, television and rock 'n' roll seemed to be getting the upper hand.  The CBC made it official in a 1971 documentary lamenting "The Vanishing Cape Breton Fiddler." 

   "That show got a few of us mad," recalls Father John Angus Rankin, one of the music's biggest supporters in recent years.  "There were still many fiddlers around," he continues, "but they were in the woods.  It was just a matter of getting in touch with them."  To prove his point, Rankin got 100 fiddlers on stage for the first Glendale fiddle festival in 1973.  Since then, the music has made a comeback, slowly at first, then exploding in the past 10 years.  "When I started, you were made fun of if you played," says Beaton with a chuckle.  "Now you are made fun of if you can't play." 

   To sample the surviving heart and soul of the classic Cape Breton fiddling style, you could do no better than drop by one Thursday night at a tiny white parish hall at Glencoe Mills.  It is to this isolated spot that Cape Bretoners drive for miles, the last 10 along a dirt road, to catch Hugh "Buddy" MacMaster play.  Dressed typically in slacks and a dress shirt, 69-year-old Buddy shows little emotion as he looks over his fiddle at a swirl of happy faces dripping with sweat.  Though he has performed throughout North America and Europe - and has even taught at the Valley of the Moon School of Scottish Fiddling in California - this is his home turf; he has been working his magic here for 30 years. 

   Before this dance is over, Buddy will have played 150 tunes.  He couldn't tell you how many he knows in total; there are simply too many.  In her book Traditional Celtic Fiddle Music of Cape Breton, author Kate Dunlay ranks Buddy as "one of the greatest Scottish fiddlers ever to have lived."  Buddy's own assessment is typically modest: "There are so many good fiddle players around today, they wouldn't miss me if I stopped playing." 

   What makes a great Cape Breton player?  It's a combination of precise tricks with the bow, a rock-solid sense of rhythm that is perfect for the dance, and a rich repertoire of old Scottish tunes and Scottish-style compositions by Cape Breton composers.  While contemporary Scottish and Irish fiddlers are given to slurring the bow, Buddy executes more notes with single, or articulated, bow strokes.  He bounces his bow to produce several distinct notes without reversing direction or replaces some single notes with three "cuts" executed by rapid changes in bow direction.  "That's not written in the music, you know," says Buddy of the manoeuvres he picked up from older players when he was growing up.  Old-time Cape Breton fiddlers will also play notes to sound like bagpipes or play the same note on two strings at once to give a fuller sound.  The result is music with great drive and lift.  "If you're not dancing, you'd better pinch yourself, because you're probably dead," says fiddler and Inverness native Sandy MacIntyre. 

   Buddy fell in love with the music as a child, he says, listening in on visiting fiddlers at "kitchen rackets," or ceilidhs, in his parents' home, then going to bed jigging (mouthing) tunes to himself.  After starting to play at the age of 11, he soon advanced to performing at weddings and parties and at 14 played his first dance for money.  As an adult, Buddy spent 45 years working as a CN stationmaster, but music was his life. "Even while I was at work, music was on my mind all the time."  He has played regularly since 1949, in summer sometimes almost every night for weeks on end.  Despite decades of persuasion by friends and recording studios, he waited 50 years before putting out a tape: "I didn't think I could.  I never had the urge to record.  I was just satisfied to play." 

   In the hall at Glencoe Mills, Buddy is partway through John Morris Rankin's The Way to Mull River Reel when a slight smile of satisfaction crosses his face.  He has noticed 6-year-old fiddler Robbie Fraser sitting at the edge of the stage, looking up admiringly at his hero.  Fifteen years ago, Carmelita and Angus MacIsaac brought their 4-year-old son, Ashley, to soak up Buddy's music in this same hall.  I still recall attending a dance there some nine years later.  A new set was starting.  The music was good, but it wasn't Buddy.  I looked up to see a little fellow with curly brown hair, hardly big enough to hold the fiddle and looking awkward bowing with his left hand.  It was Ashley - a future great fiddler pumping away for all he was worth. 

   If Buddy is all that Cape Breton fiddling has been, Ashley is poised to become its somewhat controversial future.  He was raised as solidly as Buddy in the traditional style - stepdancing as a small child, taking up the fiddle at the age of 8, and practising like a fiend, sometimes till midnight.  But he also received some formal music training, made his first recording at 16, and moves readily from traditional duets with a pianist to more raucous experiments fronting a rock-'n'-roll band. ( During a typically furious performance in Halifax, he shocked purists by smashing and step-dancing on his fiddle.)  While the music is everything for Buddy and he keeps his own presence small, Ashley seems to know instinctively that the music will get him only so far.  "All I want to do is entertain people," he says - and if that means changing the music, it's okay by him. "If you pick it up for the crowd in Cheticamp, they love it.  If that is a cop-out, so be it.  I'd rather have people be entertained." 

   "Picking it up" is what Ashley is doing the afternoon of Christmas Eve at Le Gabriel Lounge in the bustling Acadian village of Cheticamp.  Ashley is sweating profusely, both feet pounding the floor and his body lurching.  There is a loud cheer as he slips a few bars from a Christmas carol into a traditional fiddle tune.  I can see why his father says, "He kills his piano players, because he never stops."  When he has worn out a few stepdancers who come forward, he gets up and stepdances to his own playing. 

   Ashley got his big break when he came to the attention of theatre director JoAnne Akalaitis and her husband, New York avant-garde composer Philip Glass, who have summered in Cape Breton for years.  "The music was flowing out of him as if it was the most natural thing in the world," recalls Glass of his first listen to Ashley.  He and Akalaitis were putting together a production of Georg Buchner's Woyzeck for the Joseph Papp Public Theater in New York and decided they wanted Ashley to fiddle and stepdance in it.  "It was a big decision for us to let him go [to New York]," says his mother.  That move and the friendship he formed with Glass opened up new possibilities.  He has already made two appearances at Carnegie Hall and has recorded with the likes of Paul Simon.  This fall, Ashley will release his own first major-label recording on A&M. 

   Some Cape Bretoners consider Ashley's new popularity a mixed blessing, fearing that foreign influences will corrupt Cape Breton's old-style fiddling.  "They're after changing the music," says 79-year-old Joe Kennedy, as he takes a break from playing me some tunes in his cluttered house deep in the woods near Inverside.  Kennedy also objects to the flamboyant body language of fiddlers such as Ashley in full-flight performance.  "The old fellows would stand right steady," he says. "Now their bodies swing every way, so wild.  Pounding away with their feet.  They're making too much noise with their feet." 

   Beyond the obvious theatrics, the younger generation of Cape Breton fiddlers are also changing the music in subtler ways.  Many now read music, and even more of them greatly emphasize precise technique and tonal clarity in their playing.  "With the modern ear, there has been some streamlining of the music," observes author Dunlay.  And because of the easy access to other music through recordings and travel, Cape Breton fiddlers now measure themselves against the international community and are more apt to pick up outside influences.  Irish fiddling, which can be very fast, has great impact.  Noting the foreign feel of some of the playing of his talented niece, Natalie, Buddy McMaster says, "She has been in with some Irish players." 

   An overarching concern of the purists is that the newer players are losing the ineffable sense of rhythm that makes Cape Breton fiddling perfect for the dance.  "The timing is getting ruined," worries Father John Angus Rankin.  "People are playing for the money.  If a lot of people follow Ashley, they'll all get faster and eventually the timing will get lost." 

   Sitting in a hotel restaurant in Toronto, Ashley sips a Coke and shifts about like a puppy as if to shake off the criticism.  "Those people who think I play too fast should listen to some of the old recordings, especially those of Angus Chisholm," he says, referring to a giant in the tradition.  </I
   FLATTENING OUT THE MEANINGS  
   The values of High Modernism are not quite as monolithic as the Mendel Gallery's current exhibit of art from Emma Lake implies  
  by Keith Bell 

   Review: The Flat Side of the Landscape: 
  The Emma Lake Artists' Workshops 
  The Mendel Art Gallery, Saskatoon 
  October 5 to November 19, 1989  

   The choice of the Emma Lake Artists' Workshops as the centrepiece exhibition for the Mendel Gallery's twenty-fifth birthday celebrations provides an appropriate occasion to consider the way in which artists, critics and historians have sought to construct the histories of Saskatchewan art since the nineteen thirties.  Before discussing the exhibition itself, it is appropriate to consider briefly how the art schools and workshops were organized and what their directors' and co-ordinators' particular agendas actually were. 

   Organized artistic activity in Emma Lake had in fact begun sometime before the workshops dealt with in the Mendel exhibition, when President Murray of the University of Saskatchewan had established the Murray Point School of Art in 1936.  The idea for the school originated with Augustus Kenderdine, a painter and lecturer in art at the university, who directed the annual camp until his death in 1947.  Kenderdine's own painting was based upon a European training in which the prairie landscape was colonized and appropriated to accord with the ideologies of western settlement during the nineteen thirties and forties.  The resulting paintings with their "romantic" view of the northern lakes and forests effectively formed the basis for the type of work produced by the students at the school, who included artists such as Joanne Gifford, Ingrid Kaldor, Isabel Kaldor, Ruth Roeher and Ruth Pawson. 

   These individuals, many of whom were teachers, produced and in numerous cases continued to produce work of considerable quality.  This output has subsequently been largely ignored, mainly because of the increasing institutionalization and professionalization of the provincial art community (the Murray Pointers were rarely "full time" artists), and the growing hegemony of Modernist art practices - as opposed to Kenderdine's academic training - particularly in the art departments on the Saskatoon and Regina campuses. 

   This attitude that the Murray Point school was at best of passing significance, is reflected in the catalogue to the current exhibition.  Here the extensive output and exhibiting activities of individuals who attended the school is marginalized as being of "less importance" than the later workshops, the production of "teacher artists" who are not quite of the appropriate status (i.e., professional) to belong to a history of Saskatchewan art.  This essay, whose evaluative title, "Beginnings: The Murray Point Summer School of Art 1936-1955," when taken with an unexplained token painting by Kenderdine at the beginning of the exhibition, indicates that the idea of an old fashioned evolutionary art history in which certain "styles" and artists are valorized over others, is not entirely absent from the construction put forward by the organizers of The Flat Side of the Landscape.  In this case, the Murray Point school is represented as a minor curtain raiser, a secondary event before the arrival of what another catalogue essayist, Terry Atkinson, calls the "grandees," the famous artists bringing Modernist art to the prairies from New York. 

   Fortunately, a sense of the kind of work produced by artists who attended the Murray Point school before 1955 can be obtained from another exhibition -  The Forgotten Emma Lake  - currently on view at the Gordon Snelgrove Gallery in the Department of Art and Art History at the University of Saskatchewan.  The exhibition is an initial study of the school, and contains work by the artists mentioned above as well as that of Mina Forsyth, who subsequently became a full professor in the University Art Department and who attended the summer school subsequent to Kenderdine's death.  The resulting exhibition, while by no means comprehensive, is an important first step in the retrieval of one of the early histories of Saskatchewan art. 

   During the years immediately following Kenderdine's death in 1947, the balance of power in the two Saskatchewan university art departments changed from an Anglo-Canadian one to a closer identification with the Modernist influences being promoted by the powerful art interests in New York.  This was effected in Saskatoon by the new department head, Gordon Snelgrove, a promoter of Modernism and an occasional visitor to the USA, who hired Nikola Bjelajac and the American artist Eli Bornstein to teach on the faculty.  They were followed later by a series of other American appointments, including Warren Peterson, Stanley Day and James Thornsbury, and by a new generation of Canadian-born artists, who like Otto Rogers and Mina Forsyth, or Kenneth Lochhead in Regina, were either trained in the USA, or looked to that country as a useful centre of exhibition and museum resources.  As a result of these events, the art institutions of the province were, therefore, largely re-oriented towards and in some cases colonized by the USA. 

   Given these circumstances, it is not surprising that when Kenneth Lochhead, the new director of the Regina College School of Art, proposed a new two-week workshop at Emma Lake, he looked to outsiders and ultimately to New York for the workshop leaders.  There was after all only a tiny audience and an even smaller market on the prairies for the kind of work being produced by the Modernist artists.  In order to establish themselves so far from the centres which supported this form of artistic practise, they needed not only the helpful artistic influence of famous imported Modernist "stars," but also critical recognition and gallery connections in Toronto, New York and elsewhere.  It is the workshops which resulted from those needs which are the subject of the Mendel Gallery's exhibition: The Flat Side of the Landscape: The Emma Lake Artists' Workshops.  

   Beginning with Canadian leaders, Jack Shadbolt and Joseph Plaskett in 1955 and 1956 respectively, the workshop coordinators then turned mainly to Americans like Barnett Newman (1959), Jules Olitski (1964) and Clement Greenberg (1962), and British participants, notably Anthony Caro (1977) and Terry Atkinson (1987).  From the long list of leaders who attended Emma Lake between 1955 and 1989, John O'Brian, the curator / editor of the exhibition, has selected five workshops which for reasons which I will examine he believes to be "pivotal:" those led by Shadbolt, Newman, Greenberg, Steiner and Dzubas / Elderfield.  This choice dictates the shape of the exhibition which is broken up into five sections, each representing one of the workshops and containing a small selection of works produced at or near the time of those workshops.  Accompanying the exhibition is an excellently produced catalogue containing five useful essays on various aspects of Emma Lake, together with entries on exhibited works, an extensive chronology, and a series of handy appendices listing the workshop leaders and participants - the Mendel Gallery has excelled itself. 

   In fact the history of Emma Lake is due for just such an extensive reassessment, particularly at a time when recent workshops have shown an increasing tendency to become inward looking and self-referential, an act of closure which is common in art on the margins as well as an inherent condition of late Modernism itself. 

   What then does the exhibition say about activities of the workshop, and how effective is it as an intervention in the histories of Canadian art?  In his catalogue introduction, John O'Brian proposes that the show is intended to "reclaim something of the complexity" of Emma Lake's history from the "litter of anecdotes and illusions" which surround the workshops.  The complexity and the anecdotes certainly exist but they are often more effectively dealt with in some of the catalogue essays than in the form of exhibition itself. 

   The clearest example of this difficulty lies in the selection of workshops for inclusion in the exhibition.  These were chosen, O'Brian says, because "observers" (which ones?) felt that they were "pivotal" (to whom?), and yet at the same time reflected a "sense" of continuity in the workshops from one year to the next.  Artists who were part of this continuity, who attended repeatedly, like Knowles, McKay and Christie, were therefore spotlighted.   While the parts of this statement suggest contradictory situations - pivotal after all implies a decisive change in direction - the opposite is closer to the truth.  For the workshops included in the Flat Side of the Landscape are those which first introduced Modernist practices at Emma Lake (Shadbolt, Newman, Greenberg) and then reasserted that same ideology (Steiner, Dzubas / Edlerfield) on those occasions when its purity was either challenged (by Judd in 1968), or appeared to be diluted by the workshops of the mid-seventies.  The result is an exhibition which, far from showing the complexity of the workshops, instead firmly situates itself within a Modernist selective tradition whose most distinctive characteristic is its attitude of closure or exclusion with regard to other artistic discourses. 

   In the case of the Emma Lake exhibition, this means that the workshops which do not fit into this tradition, or indeed were intended to ease the logjam of Modernist ideology, are marginalized or ignored.  These include workshops led by Donald Judd (1968), R.B. Kitaj (1970) and the mid-seventies series co-ordinated by Ray Allen, who sought to achieve a wider mix of approaches to the process of art production.   In each case there were artists for whom the workshop was important, while the art community in the province was exposed to a fresh set of ideas.  By the late seventies these kinds of workshops were probably more useful than the specifically Modernist ones which reappeared in the eighties.  O'Brian's opinion of the importance of the latter is unclear, although his decision not to include any of the post-1979 workshops in the Flat Side of the Landscape could perhaps be seen as a statement of his own position. 

   The same flattening out of the meanings of Emma Lake also recurs in the choice of works for the exhibition.  Because of the emphasis on the continuity and stylistic homogeneity of the workshops, the complexity of the activities which took place in the studios at Emma Lake is lost.  For example, John Nugent, a participant at the Shadbolt and Greenberg workshops, is not included because his work is "liturgical" and therefore does not fit with the flat, non-objective (and rather poor in the case of the Greenberg session) paintings which were used to represent that continuity. 

   Similarly, the large number of women who attended the workshops are also at best thinly represented.  While John O'Brian rightly states that the project of Modernism favours male control and effectively marginalizes women who are artists, the exhibition itself simply repeats this process.  The work of relatively few women is included, and the catalogue essays do not address the problem effectively.  The opportunity for a useful intervention in the discourses of Emma Lake has been missed. 

   That this issue was, and is, an important one is evident from the response of a former participant, Andrew Hudson, who, in a panel discussion on the exhibition, responded to a question of why so few workshop leaders were women, by suggesting a round of applause for the wives of artists (note the gendering of artists here) who worked so that their husbands could concentrate on success in the art world. 

   The result of the kinds of exclusion referred to above is an exhibition which seeks to represent the Emma Lake "tradition" as a series of manoeuvers with the dominant aesthetic of Modernism.  All the awkward edges are smoothed away and the triumph of the critical theories propounded by the New York writer, Clement Greenberg, becomes the central agenda of the exhibition; an agenda reinforced by the presence of paintings by the early "grandees" of Modernism who were imported to lead the workshops.  While this is only one possible representation among several, as O'Brian with reference to Edward Said, the author of Orientalism, remarks, it is nevertheless the only one which will be seen and which will therefore be assumed to have stood for the "real" history of the Emma Lake workshops. 

   While the exhibition is problematic, the accompanying catalogue essays provide a more effective forum for addressing the issues surrounding Emma Lake.  </I
 

 <I
  Bach to Basics 
  Tafelmusik is true to the original 

   Those who still think that "early music" means dry, fussy performances on scratchy, out-of-tune instruments need only hear a Tafelmusik performance to understand how compelling period instruments can be.  Interest in "how Bach would have heard it" is only part of the reason why musicians like those in Tafelmusik, Toronto's baroque orchestra on period instruments, have spent so much time and energy mastering the intricacies of the old instruments and why their annual audience of 50,000 keeps coming back for more. 

   The music of the 17th and 18th centuries was written to be played on instruments constructed quite differently from those normally used today.  In the hands of accomplished players these instruments almost always make for naturally convincing performances, especially in terms of balance and tonal blend.  This is because they produce different sounds than those of modern orchestral instruments: lighter and less imposing sounds, which are also more subtle and colourful. 

   Now that period-instrument ensembles are firmly established in the musical life of Europe and North America, all that groups like Tafelmusik ask of a new audience member is that he or she take the performance on its own terms and ask themselves: is the music pleasing or not?  More and more, concert-goers who never expected to be captivated by such a seemingly esoteric approach are saying that it is very pleasing indeed. 

   In fact, once settled into the red cushions at Toronto's Trinity-St. Paul United Church, audience members find it hard not to be pleased.  The warmth of the surroundings matches the warmth of the ensemble onstage; there is no mistaking the fact that the musicians are having fun.  Since the ensemble normally has no conductor (music director Jean Lamon directs from her place at the head of the first violins), the players must relate to one another as they would when performing chamber music.  The resulting involvement in the music is heightened by the fact that in most of Tafelmusik's repertoire each member of the ensemble is frequently allowed - even expected - to improvise ornamentation and new melodic lines. 

   Tafelmusik is now entering its second decade with all the energy and ambition that it had in its very first season eleven years ago.  Although the orchestra is larger and many of its members have changed, the drive to be the best and to show the world what it can do has remained constant.  In the beginning the ensemble - founders Ken Solway (baroque oboe) and Susan Graves (baroque bassoon) with friends they gathered together - were happy to play in whatever venues they could find.  The move to Trinity-St. Paul in the orchestras third season brought some stability to the ensemble, although the building seemed to mirror the group's situation: full of spirit but a little ragged at the edges. 

   The church's fortunes have improved with those of the orchestra and now shining wooden staircases, long pews with red seat cushions and a refurbished 'backstage' area all reflect the polish and success which have come to Tafelmusik in the last few years under Jean Lamon's leadership.  Where once the orchestra had to work hard to half fill their halls, they now present each subscription concert two and sometimes three times.  Run-out appearances around southern Ontario have turned into world-wide tours to some of music's most prestigious centres.  Most important, those heartfelt but sometimes scrappy early appearances have become thoroughly accomplished, energetic performances by up to 23 people as Tafelmusik's repertoire has expanded beyond the baroque to include the symphonies of Haydn and his contemporaries. 

   Of great importance is the fact that the core group of twelve string players and one harpsichordist receives a full-time salary and is able to devote its entire attention to the ensemble, unlike most period-instrument orchestras.  In fact, San Francisco's Philharmonia is the only other North American baroque orchestra that can afford to operate this way.  

   The schedule for Tafelmusik's current season shows the variety and careful planning which has always been the group's hallmark under the direction of long-time general manager Ottie Lockey.  Guest soloists include both world-famous performers such as the conductor and harpsichordist Ton Koopman, besides less well known artists - like soprano Ann Monoyios - who are nonetheless first class musicians.  

   This season's programs include old favourites (one of Bach's Brandenburg Concertos) as well as more unusual repertoire (a concert presentation of Handel's opera Floridante) and a performance of one of the greatest and most difficult masterpieces of the Baroque, Bach's Mass in B minor. 

   Tafelmusik continued its traditional heavy touring schedule with a visit to several American music festivals in November 1989.  They embarked on a cross-Canada tour in January and, to cap the season, a three-week European tour (the orchestra's fifth) in June.  As well, a ground-breaking trip to the Far East is planned for next November. 

   These tours are important to the orchestra not only in financial terms (unlike larger and more unwieldy ensembles, Tafelmusik's touring helps pay the bills for its home-town concert series).  They also bring the somewhat specialized world of period-instrument performance to communities that would otherwise have little access to such music-making. 

   Tafelmusik's recent agreement to record for the international BMG (formerly RCA) group on the Deutsche Harmonia Mundi label gives the orchestra the opportunity to reach thousands of new listeners all over the world.  The infectious nature of the orchestra's live performances comes through on their first two recordings for BMG, six Concerti Grossi by Arcangelo Corelli and Concerti and Symphonies by Luigi Boccherini with Dutch cello soloist Anner Bylsma. 

   Critical reaction to these discs has been very favourable.  Tess Knighton in Gramophone magazine comments that in the Corelli performances "virtuosity and vitality are both present in generous quantities" and chooses the album as one of the best of the year, while Nils Anderson in Fanfare enthuses that the disc is "a joy from beginning to end" and that "the [recorded] sound is broad and clean with fine ambience". 

   With the release of these recordings, almost anyone can now have easy access to Tafelmusik, whether in concert at Trinity-St. Paul, on tour - or at home in front of the stereo. 
 
 </I

 <I
   I picked up one of her books.  It was The Thinking Body.  "What's this about?".
  "About relaxing, partly.  When you're sitting, standing - even jogging." 

   She stood up and began jogging up and down the room.  "Like this," she said.  She let her wrists go limp and her arms fly about.  Inside her white robe other parts of that marvellous body jiggled and jounced around.  I was so totally stunned by all this activity I didn't even think to raise my camera.  I realized later that it would have been useless.  I would have needed a motion-picture camera to record this memorable performance.  In slow motion. 

   Marilyn returned to her mirror.  "Speaking of relaxation, I went to a Yoga church for a while.  They teach complete relaxation, and there are a lot of good things in it.  But I don't go for complete nirvana.  They finally reach a state of desired nothing.  Not now.  I hope to reach that stage when I'm old, maybe.  

   Marilyn stopped putting on her make-up and stared quietly out the window for a good five minutes.  She had apparently been thinking about her childhood, for somewhat irrelevantly she asked, "Was it Freud who said that parents are the psychological murderers of their children?" 

   Marilyn's childhood had been an unhappy one: a father who disappeared before she was born; a mother she barely knew, who was hospitalized for mental illness; an orphanage; a series of foster homes, one run by religious fanatics and another where she was molested by an elderly boarder who gave her a nickel "not to tell".  When she told, she was punished - for telling a lie. 

   Today, Marilyn chose to dwell on some of the happier moments.  "I didn't have much school, you know."  

   She returned to her make-up, applying eye shadow to the top of her eyelids and soft pastel lipstick from a small jar.  She fastened on false eyelashes, half-length, extending from the middle of her eyes to the outer edge. 

   As I was making notes, Marilyn said, "I'll just give you the last verse of one.  The rest is too personal.  She recited:   O, Time
Be Kind.
Help this weary being
To forget what is sad to remember.
Loose my loneliness, Ease my mind, While you eat my flesh.  
  It was my turn to fall silent. 

   Marilyn finished her make-up and disappeared into the bathroom to shed her white robe.  She reappeared in slacks and a low-cut red blouse that buttoned up the back, but was undone. 

   Turning around, she said, "Do me up the back."  This I managed, with some fumbling. 

   Marilyn propped herself up on her bed.  "I know what," she said, "I have to learn to smoke a cigarette for my next picture.  Give me a cigarette and you can take pictures of me practising. 

   "Now, this is my French inhale," she demonstrated.  Here's how I roll the cigarette from one side of my mouth to the other with my tongue."  

   She ran through pose after pose and I shot off a whole roll of film.  For the final picture she leaned forward directly into the camera - and winked one eye. 

   As we finished, there was a knock at the door.  I opened it and found Frank Neill in an excited state.  He looked at my cameras and before entering he muttered to me in an aside, "Boss, we got a big deal going.  Don't screw this up."  Having no intention of screwing anything up, I retreated to a chair in the corner of the room. 

   Alive with excitement, Neill turned to Marilyn.  "Honey, we got a real good break.  Hy Gardner wants to use you on his coast-to-coast show tonight.  Along with Vice President Barkley.  He's going to phone here now and tape an interview."  

   "All right, Butterball," said Marilyn.  "But you talk to him first and find out what questions he's going to ask me.  I don't want him to ask questions about Joe." 
  "Fine, honey." 

   Neill picked up her phone and sat down on the bed beside her.  It took some time for Neill to get through to New York and the connection was apparently not very good because eventually he was shouting. 

   Neill put his hand over the mouthpiece.  "Honey, he says this thing between you and Joe is the hottest thing in New York - " 
  "I don't care, Butterball," said Marilyn.  "I don't care!  After all, this is my personal life.  And I know Joe wouldn't like it.  If he wants to mention Joe's name, I won't do it, that's all." 

   Neill removed his hand from the mouthpiece.  "HELLO, HY?  LOOK, HY, MARILYN DOESN'T WANT ... YES ... YES.  DON'T THINK I DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT, HY.  I AGREE WITH YOU BUT ...  OKAY, I'LL ASK HER."  He covered the phone again.  "Will you talk about baseball?" 
  "Sure.  I'll talk about baseball." 

   Marilyn crouched on the bed and put her head beside Neill's ear so she could overhear Hy Gardner's voice. 

   "HY?  YES BASEBALL IS OKAY, HY.  WHAT? ...  YES, JUST A MINUTE."  He spoke to Marilyn.  "While you're talking about baseball, can he ask just one question about Joe?" 
  Marilyn shook her head back and forth.  While they huddled over the phone I took a picture.  I think it was the first time I ever tried to photograph a telephone conversation. 

   In the lull, Marilyn appealed to me.  "Don't you think I'm right?  I don't want to turn my personal life into publicity.  I know Joe wouldn't like it.  It's not right." 

   Neill covered the phone again.  "Can he ask you about Butch?"  Butch was DiMaggio's child by his first marriage.  

   Marilyn put her hand to her forehead in despair.  

   "All right, honey.  All right, honey," Neill soothed.  He spoke into the phone again.  "HY?  NO ...  YES, I AGREE WITH YOU, HY.  BUT - NO.  YES ... ALL RIGHT ... JUST A MOMENT"  He handed the phone to Marilyn.  "He wants to talk to you." 

   Marilyn took the phone.  She listened.  "Yes, I do understand."  She listened some more.  "I would like to help you.  But not at the expense of someone else.  No.  All right.  I'm sorry.  Goodbye." 

   She put the phone down.  "He's going to skip it.  He'll get somebody else." 
  Neill wiped a hand over his face.  "It wouldn't have hurt," he said regretfully.  "It's a big show." 

   Marilyn became upset.  "Frank!" she cried.  "This is my personal life!  They wouldn't ask Jean Peters about Howard Hughes!  He wanted to ask me about Butch!  I think that's terrible!  I don't care that much about publicity!  If you like I'll phone up Spyros Skouras!" 
  Skouras was then the tsar of the movie industry.  

   Neill held up his hands to stem the flow of words.
  "Honey, it's perfectly all right.  We're only trying to look after you.  Remember, you're ours now." 
  That was the end of picture-taking for that day. 

   A day or two later the three of us were together again.  Marilyn finished work early and there was some time for a walk around Niagara for some sightseeing pictures. 

   Neill was full of ideas.  "You could be buying some postcards.  You'll probably want some anyway." 
  "No thanks," said Marilyn. 

   We came to some giant pay binoculars lined up along the Niagara Gorge for close-up viewing of the Falls.  Neill suggested this would make a good photo. 

   "I'd like to take a look through them," said Marilyn, "but no photos.  That's corny.  Like in New York they say, 'Look up at the skyscrapers.'  Do they think you've never seen a skyscraper before?  I like pictures that have some warmth, some human quality to them." 

   After Marilyn had peered at the Falls, we continued our stroll until we came to a poster advertising the Maid of the Mist boat ride.  On the spur of the moment, Marilyn announced that she wanted to make the boat trip.  Neill said he had another appointment and he left Marilyn and me to make our way down to the Maid of the Mist landing at the river's edge. 
