  

      CHAPTER ONE  
        THE STUDY OF OPEN SETTLEMENTS IN
NEW ZEALAND PREHISTORY      
  R.C. Green
      Introduction    
    Examination of a major settlement type, called kainga
in Maori, has experienced a rather uneven development in New
Zealand archaeology.   Until recently most excavation
programmes have focused on early, portable artefact-rich beach
middens or later, more massive, fortified sites.   Open or
undefended settlements, although now frequently recorded in
field surveys, have seldom been systematically studied.
  The reasons for this are explored in this introduction
which serves as a background to a set of articles on a series
of excavations designed to investigate the matter in detail in
the Pouerua Archaeological Project (Sutton 1982, 1983a, 1984a,
1985&semi; Preface, this volume).    
      The Ethnographic Baseline    
    Archaeologists have inherited the ethnographic
distinctions made by writers like Firth (1959:92) and Buck
(1949:137) between a defended or fortified position termed a
pa and an unprotected or unfortified village called a kainga.
  However, Buck was careful to state that an individual
residence was properly called kainga, as were any number of
huts collectively (c.f. Williams 1975:81), the term pa only
applying when settlements were protected by defensive works.
  Although the exigencies of the natural conformation of the
site were presumed to have had a predominant effect on the
arrangements of elements within fortifications, Firth
(1959:92) claimed the internal structure of a settlement for
  'both pa and kainga exhibited the same essential
features'  .   These were a number of rectangular
huts, ordinary ones in pole and thatch and those of better
construction with worked timbers in the wharepuni style, plus
one or more larger such houses of a superior kind, ranged in a
scattered fashion round a central place or marae area.
  Superior houses may have included some chiefly or guest
house dwellings and normally a meeting house (whare runanga),
usually carved (whare whakairo).   Raised pataka or carved
storehouses on piles also held a prominent position, while
cooking sheds, elevated stages for food storage (whata) and
underground pits for root crops such as sweet potato (rua
kumara) were scattered around the margins.   A tuahu or
sacred place and a latrine were found in more secluded
locations.  
    The difficulty with this ethnohistorically based and
somewhat composite description was that open village
settlements were seen as more or less duplicating pa, except
in the presence of defences, and that it was thought both
types of settlement typically possessed a large number of
dwellings and exhibited a high degree of residential
permanence.   In a detailed review of the ethnohistoric
accounts of the initial contact period in the late 18th
century A.D. and those of the protohistoric period in the
early 19th century, Groube (1965:35-6&semi; 64-71) effectively
challenged the view that the classic ethnographic
reconstruction of the kainga as set out above applied to
traditional Maori society at the time of contact.   In his
view   'fully developed kainga or undefended
villages'   as a typical Maori settlement form were
developed following contact with the Europeans and changes in
methods of warfare and economy (Groube 1965:70).   They were
not the usual late prehistoric settlement form as many had
assumed.   At the time of contact pa and kainga differed in
more than defensive arrangements.   Each catered in
different ways for a highly mobile population involved in
impermanent seasonal occupation of all types of settlements.
  Populations drew together in larger numbers within pa only
under conditions of warfare or threat of attack.   While
Groube 's arguments were well supported by the ethnohistoric
evidence, there was at the time only meagre archaeological
evidence for either period to back up these claims.
  Large-scale excavations of either early historic or
prehistoric open villages, or even of smaller undefended
settlements, with evidence of the essential details on housing
were lacking.  
    For the category covered by the traditional
prehistoric Maori concepts of kainga, Groube suggested the
following reconstruction based on the earliest European
accounts.   The domestic unit or household at approximately
1769 consisted   'of three or four houses, forming a
cluster or compound with associated cooking, dumping and
latrine sites'   (Groube 1965:43).   The possibility
of individual houses or pairs of houses scattered across the
landscape in a homestead pattern was considered, but not
pursued as isolated dwelling houses of the permanent kind were
seldom observed (Groube 1965:43).   In contrast, temporary
'huts' were frequently recorded, but as they were only of
passing interest to European observers there are few detailed
descriptions (Groube 1965:41-2).   Some were round, some of
lean-to construction, and others of rectangular floor plan
(Prickett 1982a:116).   More substantial dwellings were
often clustered at what Groube (1965:46) termed the communal
level.   He argued for the use of the term hamlet, rather
than village, and defined hamlets as usually comprising no
more than five or six huts and two domestic units.   These
were thought to be the normal form of kainga or undefended
hamlet in existence at the time of contact, although because
of the occasional vague but positive reference to larger
settlements, Groube (1965:49) allowed for the existence of
some communal units larger than the hamlet which were not
defended and could be called villages.  
      Identification of Dwellings    
    As archaeologists began to excavate fortified sites
and undefended settlements in a more extensive fashion, they
suffered another frustration.   On the basis of the
ethnographic and ethnohistoric record it was expected that
both categories of site would contain various kinds of
dwellings.   Yet structural evidence showed that most of the
features present were underground pits.   This led to the
interpretation that large pits were 'pit houses' or  'sunken
dwellings'.   While that interpretation has now generally
been rejected (Groube 1965:80-104&semi; Fox 1974) and most, if not
all, underground pits are currently seen as storage devices,
archaeological definition of surface dwellings conforming to
the ethnographic descriptions was slow in coming.  
    Although for the contact period Groube (1965:36-41)
summarised descriptions of Maori housing into two sizes of
dwelling, he could produce little in the way of archaeological
house plans in support of them.   Prickett (1982a:111) has
argued that Groube 's reappraisal of the traditional forms of
Maori settlement pattern in prehistory and the types of houses
present may have involved an over-reaction to the classical
descriptions of Best, Firth and Buck.   He adopts a more
flexible view.   His 'Archaeologist 's Guide to the Maori
Dwelling' is the best summary of the ethnohistoric
observations on housing from the contact period into the early
19th century.   Prickett takes the view that dwellings are
conservative in form, possessing important symbolic and
behavioural attributes which maintain that situation, and
therefore that habitations of the wharepuni form have a long
history in New Zealand.   Archaeological support for this
position has slowly accumulated and was brought together by
Davidson (1984:151-8).   Isolated examples of a handful of
archaeologically attested well-built dwellings with worked
timbers in the wharepuni form dating from the 12th to the
early 19th century are illustrated (Davidson 1984: Figure 97),
and McCulloch and Trotter (1984) have added another South
Island example.   In addition Davidson (1984: Figure 101)
provides plans for a selection of the several dozen less
substantial, probably pole and thatch, house outlines
recovered from both open settlements and pa of various
periods.   Only in the well-built worked timber houses of
the wharepuni style, and then in not all of these, has the
four-sided hearth, outlined in stone been found.   Groube
(1965:44) regarded this feature as   'an important type
fossil of the Classic Maori'   house site.   In the
other smaller and less substantial structures, a scoop
fireplace is the more common form.  
    In summary, if one was going to define domestic units
or households, hamlets, and villages on the number, form, and
size of their dwellings in association with other structural
elements, then finding and excavating dwellings was a crucial
task which it has taken New Zealand archaeologists several
decades to accomplish even in a minimal way.  
      Undefended Settlements and Site
Surveys    
    More readily accomplished was the identification and
field recording of open sites from associated features other
than dwelling remains, especially pits, terraces, middens, and
cooking areas singly and in various combinations.   Whereas
pa were once the principal settlement type recorded in most
field surveys, it soon became evident from the more intensive
and systematic form of site surveys undertaken in the last 15
years that undefended settlements in a variety of forms, many
of them representing hamlets, were in fact the more common
category in most regions.   In local areas ratios and
densities between fortified sites and open settlements varied
enormously.   Davidson (1984:167&semi; Figure 109), for example,
records that the island of Motutapu, with about 1500 hectares,
has over 200 widely distributed hamlets and only ten pa.
  Irwin (1985:4-17&semi; Figures 3, 6-9) documents in similar
detail the same kind of situation for a number of other North
Island areas such as the South Kaipara, Herekino/Whangape,
Mahurangi Harbour, East Waiheke Island, and the northern end
of Great Mercury Island.   Based on data resulting from 62
intensive field surveys of sites in the Northland and
Coromandel regions, he found that no less than 108 different
site types, most of them undefended, were described, with much
of the variation arising from terms and distinctions drawn by
individual recorders.   These he was able to rationalise to
some degree, reducing the total number by various combinations
of the data to 28 site types that could be subjected to
statistical analysis.   Still, while revealing some regional
and environmentally based patterning, the results exhibited
much randomness due to the arbitrary nature of the
classification.   As he observes, pa fall naturally into a
group which is amenable to further analysis but:
      The classification of undefended sites is
more problematical.   Firstly, their qualitative distinction
from defended sites may be artificial.   Secondly, while as
an undifferentiated group, their spatial distributions promise
coherence, further classification has its problems (Irwin
1985:17).      
Thus from an analytical point of view, the interpretation of
open settlements based on field surveys is still in its
infancy, in contrast to pa where there is a long history of
developments in taxonomy, analysis, and interpretation.  
    The difficulties of making a distinction during a
field survey between defended and undefended sites solely on
surface evidence is, of course, well known.   Investigations
on those sites which are hard to classify, such as Maioro (Fox
and Green 1982) and Waikere Creek (Irwin 1985:23), as well as
possible pa, have shown that only excavation will reveal the
presence of palisade defence, and that sites often change
their functions several times during their history,
  'being at different times an undefended base village,
a defended base village, and a defended store'  
(Davidson 1984:168).   Indeed, pit and terrace sites similar
to N33/217 at Pouto seem sometimes to function as pa within a
settlement pattern though their natural defences may appear
poor.   Moreover, excavation evidence may only make it more
difficult to decide if they are judged in isolation (Irwin
1985:23).   The qualitative distinction between the two
categories has both an historical and a contextual
dimension.  
      Excavations of Undefended Base
Settlements    
    Davidson (1984:166) states that   'the base
village or hamlet was probably a fundamental unit of
settlement throughout New Zealand prehistory'  .   The
list of well-excavated sites she is able to use to support
this claim is, however, rather limited.   Several early
settlements of this kind are known from the Palliser Bay
region (Leach and Leach 1979:251-3&semi; 266).   At one unit of
the early Moikau village, a substantial house in the wharepuni
style was found, associated with a slight terrace for cooking
and storage pits (Prickett 1979).   At the later
Makotukutuku Cross site a similar house with a central line of
postholes was uncovered on a ridge-top terrace adjacent to a
raised pit with other terraces, stone walls and mounds in the
flat below (Leach 1979:120-4).   At the early Washpool
Midden site postholes outlining cooking sheds were recovered
amidst a range of other structural features - drying racks,
pits, burials, hearths and ovens - plus rich midden debris and
numerous portable artefacts (Leach 1979:81-111).   Others
from the Coromandel Peninsula are the Sarah 's Gully and
Skipper 's Ridge settlements, late 'Archaic' sites now assigned
to the period of Expansion and Change, which were excavated by
Golson and his colleagues during the early stages of modern
archaeological investigations in the North Island of New
Zealand.   Only the latter of these has been subsequently
published (Davidson 1975).   While storage pits and
associated features like working areas, midden, scoop
fireplaces and ovens were identified as elements in the sites,
posthole patterns clearly defining dwellings were not
detected.   Slightly later sites listed by Davidson include
the pit, terrace, and midden complex at Aotea (Fox and Cassels
1983) and the physically separate low flat-topped knoll with
its pits, drains, fence post alignments, midden and terraces
lying below the pa at Hamlin 's Hill on the Auckland isthmus
(Davidson 1970a&semi; Irwin 1975&semi; Pearce 1977&semi; Walton 1979&semi; Nichol
1980&semi; Pearce and Walton 1983).   This time, along with the
usual features, convincing posthole plans for pole and thatch
houses and various less substantial sheds were recovered (Fox
and Cassels 1983:95-6&semi; Nichol 1980:218-23).   Much later but
similar sites of the Traditional period are documented by two
examples from Motutapu Island, one of which yielded evidence
for a fairly rudimentary form of dwelling (Leahy 1972&semi;
Davidson 1970b).  
      There are some other published examples of open
settlement excavations that could be added to this list.
  An early Traditional period one is at Kauri
Point.    2         2  
  There, aligned pits plus middens and other features, along
with postholes, defined a probable above ground dwelling which
went unrecognised (Green 1963a).   However, a line of major
postholes in squares B and C, rows 2 and 3, paralleling the
alignment of the pits, and some stakeholes to one side of this
line probably represent such a structure.     A
great concentration of terrace and pit complexes of varying
complexity demarcating a landscape intensively covered in open
settlements was recorded in the region of Kawerau and a number
of them investigated in detail (Phillips 1981&semi; Furey 1981&semi;
Lawlor 1981, 1984).   Again storage pits in a bewildering
variety of forms were discovered (Lawlor 1983).   Evidence
for surface houses has proved difficult to identify but at one
site some satisfying examples of several houses and a shelter
have been uncovered (Lawlor 1984:243).  
    Two things stand out from a survey of the literature
on well-conducted excavations of undefended base hamlets and
villages.   One is that very few sites of this type have in
fact been excavated, and of those only some have encompassed
really extensive areas.   The other is that the recovery of
evidence for housing in them, as is general in New Zealand
prehistoric sites (see above), has been patchy, at best.
  Another less obvious outcome is that very few of these
excavations have ever produced evidence of multiple dwellings
at the one site, although discovery of numbers of storage pits
is common.  
      Developments Elsewhere in Polynesian
Archaeology    
    Several developments elsewhere in Polynesian
archaeology appear to bear on the issues under consideration
here.   One is the convergence throughout Polynesia on the
household unit or the family-based residential complex as a
fundamental component in settlement pattern studies of Easter
Island, Samoa, Hawai'i and the Society Islands, to name some
of the better-studied examples (for fuller discussion with
references see Green 1984).   Another is the realisation
that large highly nucleated villages were uncommon in
pre-European Polynesia (Green 1970&semi; Bellwood 1979:315).
  Instead a more dispersed form of domestic unit prevailed.
  There was some concentration of these units around people
of rank.   These occurred in association with various
specialised structures, such as marae (Green 1970:32).
  Thus the pattern proposed by Groube for the Traditional
period in New Zealand proves to be quite typical of the later
prehistoric settlement patterns elsewhere in Polynesia.
  The domestic unit is the principal component in all cases.
  Intensive ethnohistoric studies have been made of the form
and function of various kinds of housing recorded at the time
of European contact in the Society Islands (Orliac 1982),
Hawai'i (Apple 1971) and the Chathams (Sutton 1983b).
  These assist greatly in the interpretation of
archaeological remains from those groups and add considerably
to the extensive but more general 20th-century ethnographic
literature on this subject.   Also in these residential
complexes the stone slab-outlined fireplace or oven in various
forms has been found to be of general Polynesian occurrence
(Green 1979), not something restricted to domestic units in
New Zealand or, in the Easter Island case, supposedly derived
from South America.  
    Perhaps of equal importance to the New Zealand
situation is the attempt by Hawaiian archaeologists to
distinguish between those sorts of habitation structures which
were temporary dwellings or temporarily occupied field
shelters and those which were of a more substantial and
permanent residential kind (Green 1980:54-63&semi; Cordy
1981:54-84).   It seems clear that, as in New Zealand,
people in prehistoric Hawaii spent a portion of their time
living in temporary shelters near their gardens, which were
often at some remove from their permanent residences.   As a
result some of the most common kinds of sites now recorded in
intensive surveys in Hawai'i are of these less substantial
forms.   They are quite different from the well-constructed
thatched Hawaiian house of the standard ethnographies, few of
which have yet been documented through excavation.   Again,
ethnographic reconstructions drawing heavily on early
19th-century accounts have not proved an entirely reliable
guide to late prehistoric dwellings as recovered through
archaeology.   The Hawaiian experience suggests, however,
that archaeological evidence of the various forms of
ethnohistorically poorly described temporary dwellings may be
as common in New Zealand as in Hawai'i, and that developing
criteria that allow one to distinguish between these two
residential categories may prove just as difficult in New
Zealand as in Hawai'i.   Certainly, as Davidson 's (1984:159)
review of existing archaeological evidence in New Zealand for
such structures documents, not many have been excavated and
  'few reconstructions of "temporary shelters" have been
proposed'  , despite their presumed ubiquity based on
the ethnohistoric references to temporary huts.  
      Pouerua Open Settlements    
    The above context places the study of open settlements
at Pouerua in its proper perspective.   First, one has in
this 9 square-kilometre block a high survival of remains from
the prehistoric period which has left a reasonably intact
archaeological landscape.   The extensive and detailed
mapping of this at the level of structural features, rather
than by site (however defined), means that a very large number
of open settlements have been identified in relation to
associated gardening complexes, peripheral defensive units,
and the main volcanic cone pa of Pouerua itself.   Next, a
wide range of variation can be established for these open
settlements, from the simplest cut terrace platform on a
hillock, or slight depression across a low lying ridge spur,
to a complex of terraces, flats and depressions ranging from
possible to almost certain subterranean store pits.
  Moreover, on the flat areas of many of these sites, and
elsewhere as well, the stone slab-outlined hearth is quite
common, strongly suggesting that numbers of these terraces and
flats once carried some form of housing.   The objectives,
therefore, of a set of excavations involving a series of open
settlements could be reasonably clearly formulated.  
    Site surveys at Pouerua, both preliminary (Phillips
1980) and at a much more intensive level (Leatherby and Morgan
n.d.), identify the open settlement as the predominate
habitation component integrated into and closely associated
with an extensive system of structural features related to
gardening activities.   Moreover, sites in this category
exhibit sufficient internal variability to indicate that any
useful sample excavation of them would have to extend from an
examination of some of the simplest types through to several
of the more complex examples, and in each case would have to
involve exposures of large excavation areas.   Concentration
would also have to be on those areas of each site likely to
yield evidence of housing, although other associated features
should be at least minimally investigated too.   As observed
by Green (1984) for most settlement pattern studies in
Polynesia, the concern has usually been with the structural
feature to structural feature and site to site type of
analysis.   Only occasionally has there been consideration
of the portable artefact to artefact and portable artefact to
structural feature or their within feature and site
distribution.   Thus studies such as Prickett 's (1979) of
the various portable artefact classes differentially
distributed within a house are rare in Polynesia and more are
badly needed if the functional interpretations of dwellings,
for example, are to develop.   It is also from such analyses
that the distinctions between temporary and more permanent
types of housing, and of those for special purposes, are
likely to be detected and sustained.   This means then that
a close three-dimensional recording and plotting of not just
the individual structural elements but also the portable
artefacts in and around them must be employed as part of the
excavation strategy.  
    The need therefore was to conduct a set of excavations
on open settlements at Pouerua which revealed in some measure
the range in the types of residential and related structures
plus portable artefacts found within them.   Our knowledge
in New Zealand archaeology of open settlements and their
internal organisation depended too heavily on a limited set of
individual sites from a widely spaced range of localities
scattered over various points in the prehistoric sequence and
often divorced in large part from the broader archaeological
landscape in which they were once set.   What was required
was data, especially on dwellings, from a number of such open
settlements in one locality and for one period of New Zealand
prehistory, embedded in a more or less intact archaeological
landscape with all its other elements.   This would allow us
to develop more fully an interpretation of the late
prehistoric kainga.   The excavation in five such sites at
Pouerua fills that objective.   It is those investigations
which are reported in this volume.      
  

        FROM BAY OF ISLANDS TO ADMIRALTY
BAY    
      6 December 1769-31 March 1770    
    After leaving the Bay of Islands on 5 December, the
  Endeavour   sailed north in difficult offshore winds
past the Cavalli Islands, where several canoes came out to
trade, soon leaving them behind as the ship picked up a
southerly breeze.   On 9 December they sighted Tokerau,
  'a deep Bay'      1     that Cook
named Doubtless.   Later that morning, as the ship lay
becalmed off the Karikari Peninsula, five canoes came out but
kept at a safe distance.   After these canoes returned to
land six more canoes visited the ship, whose crews told the
Europeans that they had heard of their guns and traded them
quantities of various fish and garments.   Tupaia asked
these people about their country:
    They told him that at the distance of
three days rowing in their canoes, at a place called
Moorewhennua [Muriwhenua], the land would take a short turn to
the southward and from thence extend no more to the West.
  This place we concluded must be Cape Maria Van Diemen, and
finding these people so intelligent desird him to enquire if
they knew of any Countries besides this or ever went to any.
  They said no but that their ancestors had told them to the
NW by N or NNW was a large countrey to which some people had
saild in a very large canoe, which passage took them up to a
month: from this expedition a part only returnd who told their
countreymen that they had seen a countrey where the people
eat hogs, for which animal they usd the same name (Booah) as
is usd in the Islands.   And have you no hoggs among you?
said Tupia.   - No.   - And did your ancestors bring none
back with them?   - No.   - You must be a parcel of Liars
then, said he, and your story a great lye for your ancestors
would never have been such fools as to come back without them.
  Thus much as a specimen of Indian reasoning.   After
much conversation our freinds left us but promisd to return at
night and bring with them fish, which they did and sold it
very reasonably.      2        
    This story of a canoe voyage to a large country
north-northwest of Muriwhenua, where the people had
  'booah'  , or pigs, is intriguing, because the
only
  caption    map  
large island in that direction is New Caledonia.   Pigs were
evidently not introduced there until Cook 's visit in 1774,
however,    3     although there were pigs (boa)
in Vanuatu at this time.   Tupaia was openly sceptical of
this story, and in his dismissal of the local people
exhibited a Polynesian chauvinism that was to become
increasingly evident during the rest of the voyage.    
    The next morning the   Endeavour   sailed past
the entrance of Rangaunu Bay, northwards to Houhora Harbour.
  At the entrance to Houhora was a high hill that they named
Mount Camel.   As the ship was abreast of Mount Camel a
large fire was seen on the Karikari Peninsula, and Cook
described the landscape as follows:
      No Country upon Earth can looke
more barren than the land about this Bay doth, it is in
general low except the mountain just mentioned and the Soil to
all appearence nothing but white sand thrown up in low
irregular hills lying in narrow ridges parallel with the Shore
...   The first ridge behind the sea beach is partly cover 'd
with shrubs Plants &amp;c but the second ridge hath hardly any
green thing upon it which induced me to think that it lies
open to the western Sea.   As barren as this land appears it
is not without inhabitants, we saw a Village on the side of
Mount Camel [according to Wilkinson,    'several
Hipas'  ] and a nother on the Eastern side [Karikari]
besides five Canoes that were pulling off to the ship but did
not come up with
us.        4        
    During the next few days the   Endeavour  
tacked on and off the coast in unfavourable winds, leading
Banks to comment that     'we turnd all day without
loosing anything, much to the credit of our old Collier, who
we never fail to praise if she turns as well as
this'    .    5       On 14 December
they sighted land, which Cook thought must be the northern end
of the country, for the ship was rolling in huge westerly
swells.   On 16 December, as the   Endeavour   was
driven out to sea by the westerlies, the   St Jean
Baptiste,   a French ship that was also on a voyage of
discovery, was blown in the opposite direction around North
Cape.   By an extraordinary coincidence, the first two
European ships to visit New Zealand since the mid-seventeenth
century sailed past each other in a gale, unaware of each
other 's presence.  
    Two days later the   Endeavour   approached
Murimotu (the island off North Cape), where some people were
sighted and a paa that Banks thought was surrounded by a
mud wall.   On 24 December Manawataawhi (the Three Kings
Islands) came into view.   The wind had died down so Banks
went out in a row-boat to shoot gannets, which they ate the
next day as a Yuletide   'goose pie'  .
      25 Christmas Day.   Our Goose
pye was eat with great approbation and in the Evening all
hands were as Drunk as our forefathers usd to be upon the like
occasion.        6        
    The   Endeavour   finally turned south on 1
January 1770.   During the next two weeks the ship cruised
the west coast of the North Island, keeping a respectful
distance from the land.   Near Taranaki mountain (whose name
Molyneux recorded as   'Ohacabeetee'  , Parkinson
as   'Whakapeete'   - maybe a confusion with
Kaapiti Island - and which Cook named Mount Egmont), they
sighted a few houses and a fire, but otherwise no signs of
life were seen.   On 14 January the ship sailed past
Tasman 's 'Murderers Bay', sighting a fire on a small island in
Admiralty Bay, and on 15 January the   Endeavour  
entered Totara-nui (Queen Charlotte Sound) for its last
and longest stay in any New Zealand harbour.  
    TOTARA-NUI (QUEEN CHARLOTTE SOUND)  
      15 January-6 February 1770    
    Totara-nui was a maze of deep bays, inlets and islands
carved out of the north  -  eastern end of the South
Island.   Its waterways wandered far inland amongst steep
hills and headlands, which in 1770 were covered with a rain
forest of podocarps and hardwoods, although the wind-blown
hills around the outer sound were quite barren.   Kereruu
(wood pigeons), kaakaa (parrots), parakeets, weka, tui and
bellbirds lived in the bush, where kiekie and mamaku
(tree-fern with its edible root) and tawa, titoki and miro
trees, supplejack and fuchsia (with their edible berries) grew
in abundance.   The landscape was rugged and
magnificent, with high hillsides covered in fern above the
treeline, alternating with sheltered valleys and gullies
where root crops had once been grown.    7    
  Groves of karaka and ngaio grew along the coast with
thickets of maanuka on the promontories, and flocks of
seabirds including oystercatchers, herons, shags, petrels,
dottrels and little blue penguins wheeled or waddled about the
rocky shoreline.    8      
    Totara-nui 's wealth, however, came from the water,
with its coastal beds of cockles, mussels, oysters, scallops,
and in some places paaua and crayfish, and inexhaustible
supplies of fish, including flounder, mackerel, kahawai,
haapuku, barracouta and shark.    9       The
creeks that ran down the hills had inanga (whitebait), eels
and freshwater crayfish, and fishing of various kinds was the
main industry in this water-bound place.  
    Totara-nui had a complex and ancient history, for it
had long been a staging point in migrations from the North to
the South Island.   The safest and quickest passage across
Raukawa-moana (Cook Strait) was the sea-path from Owhariu at
the southern end of the North Island to Arapaoa (now Arapawa
Island) at the entrance to the Sounds, using Ngaa Whatu (the
eyes - the Brothers Islands) as a guide.   According to
tribal accounts, Ngaa Whatu, placed there by Kupe, were so
tapu that only a tohunga or a very high-born person could look
at them, and the eyes of the paddlers had to be covered with
karaka leaves as they made the crossing, guided by a tapu
steersman.    10      
    South Island traditions speak of a number of ancestral
canoes, including   Takitimu, Te Waka-o-Aoraki, Te
Waka-huruhuru-manu, Arai-te-uru  , and   Uruao  
(which was brought by the ancestor Raakaihautuu, who dug many
of the South Island lakes with his digging stick).
  Raakaihautuu 's people were the Waitaha, an
industrious, peaceful folk who were said to have brought
kauru (cabbage trees), aruhe (fernroot) and mamaku with them,
as well as many species of birds.    11    
  They were expert in sacred matters, and most of the South
Island rock drawings, executed in a black paint made of the
soot of monoao wood, rautawhiri berry juice and weka oil, were
attributed to them by later tribes.    12    
  Another ancient people were the Rapuwai, big clumsy men
said to be up to eight feet tall, who were sometimes thought
to have come with
    Rakaihautuu    Raakaihautuu     on the
  Uruao   canoe.    13       This canoe
is reported to have visited the Sounds, then called Te Tauihu
o te Waka (the prow of the canoe) after one ancient
description of the South Island - Te Waka-o-Aoraki (the canoe
of Aoraki).    14      
    Kupe also came to the Sounds, chasing a giant octopus
all the way from Hawaiki, and this visit was remembered in
many local place-names - Arapaoa, after the downward path of
his whalebone weapon as he hit the creature 's head&semi; Whekenui
(big octopus), the bay in Tory Channel where it was killed&semi;
Ngaa Whatu-kai-ponu, where the octopus 's eyeballs were placed
as a witness to Kupe 's deed&semi; Kura-te-Au (Tory Channel), where
the current ran red with the octopus 's blood&semi; Te Mimi-o-kupe
(Kupe 's urinating), a spring on Wedge Point in Totara-nui&semi; and
many other names.    15      
  map    caption  
    Successive waves of migrants from the North Island -
Ngaati Mamoe, Ngaati Tuumatakokiri, Ngai Tara-pounamu, the
Ngaati Kurii of Ngai Tahu, Ngaati Kuia and Ngaati Apa moved
through the Sounds, each leaving groups of descendants behind
them.   By 1769, according to some accounts, Totara-nui was
dominated by the latest arrivals, a party of
Rangitaane    16     led by Te Rerewa, who had
exchanged his lands around Lake Wairarapa for a fleet of seven
canoes in which to make the migration across Raukawa-moana.
  Like all of the previous northern migrants apart from
Ngaati Kurii, Rangitaane traced their ancestry from the
  Kura-haupo   canoe    17     and Te
Rerewa also had close kinship links with Ngai
Tara-pounamu.   These kinship ties and a network of
intermarriages among the previous occupants of the area may
explain why at the time of the   Endeavour   's arrival,
each of the tribes mentioned above evidently still had
settlements in the various inlets and bays of the Sounds, and
according to an early Ngaati Kuia source, Ngaati Apa occupied
the outer reaches of Totara-nui.    18      
    As the   Endeavour   sailed into Totara-nui on
the morning of 15 January 1770, a current swept her towards
some rocks at the north-west entrance.   The boats were
lowered and towed the ship clear, watched by a male sea lion
that had surfaced nearby.   According to Banks:
      the land on both sides appeard
most miserably barren till we got pretty deep in when it began
to mend by gradual degrees.   Here we saw some canoes who
instead of coming towards us went to an Indian town or fort
built upon an Island nearly in the middle of the passage,
which appeard crowded with people as if they had flockd to it
from all parts&semi; as the ship aproachd it they wavd to us as if
to invite us to come to them but the moment we had passd by
they set up a loud shout and every man brandishd his weapons
which none of them were without.   The countrey about us was
now very fertile to appearance and well wooded so we came to
an anchor about long cannon shot from the fort, from whence 4
Canoes were immediately dispatched to reconoitre I suppose
and in case they were able to take us, as they were all well
armd.   The men in these boats were dressd much as they are
represented in Tasmans figure, that is 2 corners of the
cloth they wore were passd over their shoulders and fastned to
the rest of it just below their breast, but few or none had
feathers in their hair.   They rowd round and round the ship
defying and threatning us as usual and at last hove some
stones aboard which we all expected to be a prelude of some
behaviour which would oblige us to fire upon them&semi; but just at
this time a very old man in one of the boats express 'd a
desire of coming on board, which we immediately encouraged,
and threw a rope into his canoe by which she was immediately
hawld up along side and the old man (contrary to the opinion
of all the other Indians who went so far as to hold him fast
for some time) came on board, where he was received in as
freindly a manner as we possibly could and had many presents
given to him, with which he returnd to the canoes who
immediately joined in a war dance - whether to show their
friendship or enmity it is impossible to say, we have so often
seen them do it on both those
occasions.        19        
    The local people had congregated at a paa on the
southern end of Motuara Island, with sentinels posted at
  'the point of the bay'      20    
(possibly Cape Jackson), for Magra reported that an armed
watchman at that location was twice relieved as the
  Endeavour   sailed into the Sound.   He added that
as the ship passed Motuara,     'an old Indian, in a
singular kind of habit, came down to the waterside, attended
by several of his countrymen, and there performed some
mysterious rites, with a matt and feathers,
&amp;c'        21     - no doubt a tohunga
who was carrying out rituals in an attempt to avert harm from
these extraordinary visitors.   The four canoes that had
been sent from the paa had about sixty-five warriors on board,
and the courageous old man who boarded the vessel (later
identified by Banks as 'Topaa', or 'Topea' in the Banks
vocabulary    22    ) must have been an
important elder, for Magra said that he was
  'apparently of some distinction among them'  .
  As he came on board Tupaia greeted him with a hongi.
  His companions in the canoes laughed uproariously and then
eagerly boarded the vessel
themselves.    23      
    Later that afternoon the local people returned to
Motuara while the   Endeavour   's men collected wood and
water at Meretoto (which Cook named Ship Cove), shot numerous
shags, gathered mussels and other shellfish and made a huge
haul of 300 pounds of fish in the ship 's seine.   Parkinson
commented that some of these fish weighed up to twenty-one
pounds each, and he later listed the fish that they caught in
the Sounds as cuttlefish (probably octopus)&semi; large bream
(probably snapper) some of which weighed twelve pounds and
tasted like fine salmon&semi; small gray   'breams'  
(probably tarakihi)&semi; small and large barracouta (makaa)&semi;
flying gurnards (kumukumu)&semi; horse mackerel&semi; dogfish (pioke)&semi;
soles and dabs (flatfish of various kinds)&semi; mullet&semi; drums
(sciaenidae)&semi; scorpaenas, or rockfish (scorpionfish)&semi; colefish
(blue cod - raawaru)&semi; and   'the beautiful fish called
chimera'  
(elephant  -  fish).    24      
    Despite this splendid variety of sealife, Banks and
Solander were disappointed with Meretoto, for they found only
two new species of plants there.   Cook, on the other hand,
was delighted with the place, for it had a fine stream of
excellent water, and     'as to Wood the land here is
one intire forest'    .    25      
    At daybreak on the morning of 16 January, three canoes
brought about 100 people (including women) from the paa to the
  Endeavour  .   Banks commented that the presence of
women was   'a sign tho not a sure one of peacable
inclinations'  ,    26     which suggests
that women had been among some of the groups that had
previously confronted the   Endeavour.   The ship
had been careened for scrubbing, and when the longboat put off
with a load of casks these people tried to follow it in their
canoes.   A musket loaded with smallshot was fired at them,
whereupon they immediately returned to the vessel.   They
now offered    'stinking fish'   (probably dried
shark) in exchange for European goods, and traded peacefully
until two men were barred from coming on board by the master.
  They threatened him with their spears and were physically
forced back into their canoes.   Shortly after this another
man tried to snatch some goods from the deputy purser, and
then threatened him with his patu.   As soon as Cook saw
this he fired a musket loaded with duckshot, wounding the man
in the knee and on the foot.   According to Magra:
      His wounds producing a plentiful
hemorrhage, [the warrior] bathed them in salt water, and the
pain being acute, he angrily threw the fish which he had sold,
and for which he had been paid, into the sea.   The Indians
who were in the other canoes, did not appear surprized either
at the report of the gun or the wounds it had made, though
they all paddled round and examined them&semi; nor did the wounded
Indian retire, but wrapping himself up in mats he continued
about the ship several
hours.        27        
    After this the people paddled about the ship for a
time, eventually approaching the stern, where they talked
with Tupaia   'about their antiquity and legends of
their ancestors'  .    28       They
apparently told him that they had never either seen or heard
of a ship such as the   Endeavour   visiting their
coastline before.   This is not surprising, since these were
probably quite recent migrants to the area who were unlikely
to have heard of Tasman 's encounters with Ngaati Tumatakokiri
over a century before.   Some of this group, both men and
women, wore headdresses made of bundles of black feathers that
had been rounded and tied to the top of their heads, a dress
item the Europeans had not seen before and which Parkinson
depicted in a number of sketches.    29    
  These head-dresses have sometimes since been described as
   'mourning hats'  , although similar feather
head-dresses were also worn in historic times as a mark of
high rank.  
    That afternoon Cook, Banks, Tupaia and others went
into the pinnace to a cove about a mile to the north, where
they saw a woman 's body (which at first they mistook for a
seal) floating in the water.   They rowed past it to the
shore, and as they landed all but one member of a small family
group that had been cooking on the beach ran off into the
woods.   After a while these people returned, except for an
old man and a child, who stayed in sight amongst the outermost
trees.   The Europeans examined an earth oven on the beach,
which later proved to contain a dog 's carcass, and a large
number of food baskets nearby.   In one of these they saw
two bones that had been almost picked clean, which on closer
inspection seemed to be bones from a human forearm.   Cook
traded for one of these bones, and in consternation asked the
family members if they were not dog bones.   In answer one
of them took hold of the flesh of his own forearm and
pretended to chew it.   As Banks later commented:
      Tho we had from the first of our
arrival upon the coast constantly heard the Indians
acknowledge the custom of eating their enemies we had never
before had a proof of it, but this amounted almost to
demonstration: the bones were clearly human, upon them were
evident marks of their having been dressd on the fire, the
meat was not intirely pickd off from them and on the grisly
ends which were gnawd were evident marks of teeth, and these
were accidentaly found in a provision basket.   On asking
the people what bones are these? they answerd, The bones of a
man.   - And have you eat the flesh?   - Yes.   - Have
you none of it left?   - No.   - Why did you not eat the
woman who we saw today in the water?   - She was our
relation.   - Who then is it that you do eat?   - Those
who are killd in war.   - And who was the man whose bones
these are?   - 5 days ago a boat of our enemies came into
this bay and of them we killd 7,    30     of
whoom the owner of these bones was one.   - The horrour that
apeard in the countenances of the seamen on hearing this
discourse which was immediately translated for the good of the
company [perhaps by Tupaia or by Parkinson, who later wrote a
vocabulary of words from Queen Charlotte] is better conceivd
than describd.   For ourselves and myself in particular we
were before too well convincd of the existence of such a
custom to be surprizd, tho we were pleasd at having so strong
a proof of a custom which human nature holds in too great
abhorrence to give easy credit
to.        31        
      Banks as a natural scientist was gratified to have
proof of the practice of cannibalism, but the seamen were
horror-struck to find that the old seafaring tales of
'anthropophagi' (people-eaters) at the edges of the known
world were true.   Superstition was rife amongst sailors,
and fears of witches (who were thought to eat human flesh)
were still commonplace.   Even the better-educated officers
became obsessed with cannibalism during their stay in the
Sounds, and often wrote about the custom in their journals.
  Wilkinson commented,   'These Poor Wretches are at
war even with their Next Dore Nabours,'   and
Pickersgill wrote:
    we saw one of the Bodys and two arms
with flesh upon them which we saw them eat this is the first
Proof Possitive we have had of the Inhabitants being CANIBALS
and I belive these are the only People who kill their fellow
creatuers Puerly for the meat which we are well Assured they
do by their laying in wait one for another as a sportsman
would for his game and they carry this detestable crime so far
as to glory in carrieing in their ears the Thumbs of those
unhappy sufferrs who fell in their
way.      32        
    Magra, on the other hand, seemed delighted to be able
to contradict those armchair philosophers in Europe who denied
that the custom had ever existed.   He also made it clear
that local people were far from apologetic about the practice:
    Perhaps they thought, like a
celebrated philosopher, that it was as well to feed on the
bodies of their enemies, (for by their own accounts they eat
no other) as to leave them to be devoured by crows.   It is
however certain that they had no belief of any turpitude in
this practice, because they were not ashamed of it&semi; but, on
the contrary, when we took up an arm for examination, they
imagined us to be desirous of the same kind of food, and with
great good nature promised that they would the next day spare
a human head ready roasted, if we would come or send to fetch
it.   Some gentlemen, who never left their own homes, have
ventured, on the strength of speculative reasoning, to
question the veracity of those travellers who have
published accounts of cannibals in Africa and America&semi;
treating as falsehoods every relation, which, from their
ignorance of human nature, appears to them improbable: but
let them not indulge the same freedom on this occasion&semi; the
fact will be too well attested to be rendered doubtful by
their visionary impertinent
objections.      33        
    Banks added that the floating corpse of the woman they
had seen had been sunk in the sea with a stone by her
relatives, a custom of the Sounds, but it had somehow got
loose and floated back to the surface, where it was claimed by
her 'brother' the next day.   Not surprisingly, perhaps, the
cove where these observations were made was named
'Canibals Cove', and the sailors called the Sound 'Cannible
Harbour'.  
    Early the next morning Banks was woken by a marvellous
carillon of bird  -  song from the land:
    This morn I was awakd by the singing
of the birds ashore from whence we are distant not a quarter
of a mile, the numbers of them were certainly very great who
seemd to strain their throats with emulation perhaps&semi; their
voices were certainly the most melodious wild musick I have
ever heard, almost imitating small bells but with the most
tuneable silver sound imaginable to which maybe the distance
was no small addition.   On enquiring of our people I was
told that they have observd them ever since we have been here,
and that they begin to sing at about 1 or 2 in the morn and
continue until sunrise, after which they are silent all day
like our
nightingales.      34      
  
    After this avian concert a small canoe came out from
Motuara to visit the ship, carrying among others Topaa and a
woman whose husband had been recently killed and eaten at a
place to the east (presumably somewhere on Arapaoa Island).
  Her arms, thighs and legs were scarified in mourning.
  The conversation turned to the topic of cannibalism,
and one of the men on this canoe traded Banks a human forearm
bone, biting and chewing on it   'in such a manner as
plainly shew 'd that the flesh to them was a dainty
bit'  .    31       Tupaia again
interrogated these people about the custom:  
        But where are the sculls, sayd Tupia,
do you eat them?
  Bring them and we shall then be convinced that these are
men whose bones we have seen.   - We do not eat the heads,
answerd the old man who had first come on board the ship, but
we do the brains and tomorrow I will bring one and shew you.
  - Much of this kind of conversation passd after which the
old man went home.      36        
    This group also told the Europeans that they were
expecting an imminent attack   'over the hills'  
(probably from Port Gore) by the relatives of the canoeload of
people that they had killed.   This suggests that they had
congregated in the paa on Motuara and posted sentries for that
reason, and not because of the   Endeavour   's
arrival.  
    Most of the sailors were kept very busy during their
stay at Totara-nui, scrubbing the ship on both sides and
treating the timbers with a    'mixture of Tallow and
Venetian red'   (an interesting parallel with the Maori
practice of painting their war canoes with mixtures of oil and
red ochre), caulking with oakum and tarring any gaps,
repairing the casks, ironwork and rigging, collecting wood,
water and green vegetables, drying out the powder and baking
the ship 's biscuits to kill the innumerable weevils that
infested them.      
  

      5  
      While the French were at Sea    
      A  ll the planning had at last led to
positive action: the   Aube   and the   Comte de
Paris   were on their way to New Zealand to lay the
foundations of a French colony.   But while they were at
sea, publication of their plans led to the arousal of
patriotic passions on both sides of the Channel and, at the
same time, quite independent visits of French and British
warships to Akaroa revealed some of the realities of the
situation into which the French colonists were heading.  
    The visiting French naval captain, Dumont d'Urville,
judged that Akaroa was not a suitable site for a settlement,
but this opinion came too late to influence the plans of the
French Government and the Nanto-Bordelaise Company.   The
visit of the British warship was crucial, for it was there as
part of Hobson 's plan to waste no time in extending British
sovereignty to the South Island as well as the North.   What
is more, Lavaud made a decision while at sea to go against his
written instructions, and this resulted in the British
authorities in New Zealand becoming aware of French
intentions.  
    Lavaud 's pessimism about the outcome of the French
colonising voyage to New Zealand was matched by a prediction
in a British newspaper:   'Our neighbours will be a day
late for the fair'  .   There had been numerous
rumours in Britain about French plots   'to foil the
plans of England'   and British newspapers noted that
Hobson 's departure for New Zealand caused French newspapers to
call for French Government action to protect French commercial
interests.   But the Nanto-Bordelaise Company had been
successful in keeping its plans secret until the
  Aube   and the   Comte de Paris   were almost
ready to sail.   There is no reference to the company in the
Foreign Office files prior to February 1840.   And there was
certainly nothing to match the minor flurry caused in 1838 and
1839 by Baron Thierry and by the arrival of French Catholic
missionaries in New Zealand.  
    But then, on 15 February 1840, the   Journal du
Havre   published an account of the Nanto-Bordelaise
Company 's project which mentioned the French Government 's
intention to set up a penal colony.   This article was
reprinted in a number of British papers a few days later, and
the London-based New Zealand Company made sure that the
British Government received a copy.   The   Journal du
Havre   published another more substantial item on the
French plans to colonise New Zealand on 26 February, which was
also sent to the Foreign
Office.    1        
    The reaction of the British press was a mixture of
outrage at France 's plans for a penal colony, anxiety about
their possible success and confidence that Britain had prior
rights to New Zealand.   Deported French prisoners would be
free on British land, wrote the   New Zealand Journal  
magnanimously, and French settlers should be encouraged to
become British citizens and use their expertise to grow
grapes, olives and mulberries.   The small scale of the
French venture made the British feel that it was not a great
threat to their interests, for the New Zealand Company had
already sent out a much larger contingent of emigrants and,
although news of Hobson 's arrival in New Zealand had not yet
got back to London, it was thought likely that he had probably
already annexed New Zealand in the name of the British
Government.   Nevertheless, arguments in favour of British
rights to sovereignty over New Zealand were rehearsed and the
possible presence of a French convict settlement on British
soil near British settlers keenly
criticised.    2      
    In response to a request from the Foreign Office, the
British consuls at Le Havre and Bordeaux kept the British
Government accurately informed about the French colonising
project, but only after the matter had come out into the open
in the press.    3       According to the
British press in general and the New Zealand Company in
particular, it was the British Government 's policies on New
Zealand which had allowed the French to think that they could
seize the South Island.   Although New Zealand lay within
the British sphere of influence and was assumed by the British
to be theirs if they wanted it, its precise legal status was
very uncertain in the late 1830s.  
    Caught between the commercial interests of the
colonising lobby led by the New Zealand Company and the
missionary lobby that, notably in   The Times,  
expressed strong opposition to the corrupting influence of
European colonisation upon native peoples, the British
Government took the view in 1839 that New Zealand was an
independent country, not a British colony.   Under pressure
from the New Zealand Company, it finally agreed with great
reluctance to send Hobson to New Zealand to obtain formal
cession of sovereignty from the Maori to the British Crown in
the professed hope of thereby protecting the Maori, through
the imposition of British law, from the excesses of
Europeans.  
    However, this action publicised the fact that Britain
did not regard New Zealand as already hers.   Any other
European power was therefore free to annex New Zealand if it
could get there first and negotiate a treaty of cession with
the Maori people.   The publication of Hobson 's instructions
from the British Government, along with a Treasury minute
authorising expenditure on his voyage, was seen by the New
Zealand Company as the trigger that set off the French
colonising scheme:
      Then came the Treasury minute which
brought into question the fact of sovereignty, which no
Englishman ever before questioned.   In reference to which
foreign countries, jealous of our proceedings in regard to
colonisation, had refrained from taking any particular steps.
  Instantly a company was formed in France based on this
partial repudiation of the British rights of
sovereignty.      
  This argument had already been advanced in general terms
by the New Zealand Company and is supported by a later French
Naval Ministry document, but not by French documents that were
contemporary with the publication of Hobson 's
instructions.    4      
    In fact, as we have seen, French plans were well under
way by the time they received a copy of Hobson 's instructions
in late October 1839 and were following a momentum of their
own.   The French Foreign Affairs Ministry had noted the
British Government 's views on the independence of New Zealand
as early as June 1838.   And when the Chambers of Commerce
of Le Havre, Nantes and Dunkirk reacted to the publication of
Hobson 's instructions by asking the French Government to take
possession of part of the New Zealand coast, the Foreign
Affairs Minister was able to reply that their idea had been
anticipated and that action had already been taken to achieve
this.    5      
    With or without the Treasury minute, the French
Government regarded the North Island as effectively British
and the South Island as Maori.   The effect on the French of
their knowledge of Hobson 's instructions was probably to make
the Government more cautious about offending Britain and to
inhibit international bankers like the Rothschilds from
putting a lot of capital into a risky venture.   That is,
although it reinforced the French sense of urgency, it ensured
that their colonising in New Zealand was on a small
experimental scale.   Even so, public pressure led Lord John
Russell, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, to publish
his official correspondence on the subject and newspapers
reprinted it in serial form: April 1840 was New Zealand month
for the British press.    6      
    British reaction to the news of the departure of the
French colonists also led to public meetings of protest.
  In particular, a public meeting was held at the Guildhall
in London on 15 April.   Its aim was to petition the Queen
and both Houses of Parliament to uphold British sovereignty in
New Zealand   'at present endangered by foreign
pretensions'  , to establish the rule of law there and
to promote the most beneficial form of colonisation.   The
third aim would not be achieved by the French, who had gone to
New Zealand,   'not to co-operate in our beneficent
views, but for the purpose of establishing a penal
colony'  .   So that,   'even if France really
possessed any right of colonisation, your petitioners would
deprecate in the strongest terms her proposed establishment of
a penal colony, it being evidently impossible that convict
discipline can be maintained in the immediate vicinity of
native tribes and British
settlements'  .    7       Copies of the
petition were soon circulating in France, where Adolphe
Balguerie lamented that all his British business connections
had signed it.    8      
    A month later, a meeting of merchants, bankers,
manufacturers and shipowners in Glasgow petitioned the Queen
and the Houses of Parliament in the same manner.   Again
they requested that measures be taken to prevent colonisation
of New Zealand by the French and to impose British law.
  Again they objected in particular to French plans for a
convict settlement:       'Were we tamely to allow
that beautiful island to become the dunghill of France?...
  English blackguards were bad enough - and so were Scotch,
and even Highlanders were bad&semi; but French were the worst of
all&semi; and to send them to that country was not to be
endured.'        9      
    The pressures exerted on the British Government by the
New Zealand Company through these meetings, through the press
and through individual lobbying were unnecessary, for Hobson,
on the instructions of the British Government, was already
busy determining the fate of New Zealand.   Even so, the
Foreign Office instructed the British Ambassador in Paris to
ascertain whether it was the French Government 's intention to
form a penal settlement in New
Zealand.    10       This action was prompted
in the first instance by a report from the British Consul in
Teneriffe, who announced that the   Comte de Paris   had
arrived at the island of Palma on its way to New Zealand and
Australia, where it was intending to form a settlement.
  But the argument advanced by the Foreign Office about the
problems associated with the coexistence of British settlers
and French colonists was the same as that voiced by the New
Zealand Company and its supporters.  
    The Guildhall petition was placed before a select
Parliamentary committee on New Zealand in July.   In the
discussion that took place, a distinction was made between
British rights of sovereignty over the South Island and the
North Island.   The independence of New Zealand was seen as
referring to the North Island only, for it was North Island
chiefs that had petitioned William IV in 1831 for his
protection against the French and who had formed a
confederation of tribes in 1835, whose independence was
recognised by the British Government.   The North Island had
a substantial number of Maori inhabitants, whose consent to
British rule had to be obtained.   The South Island, on the
other hand, was seen as virtually uninhabited, making a treaty
of cession far less meaningful there.   This distinction was
made clear to Hobson in an official despatch from Lord
Normanby, who was told that, in such a case, British
sovereignty should be asserted on the ground of
discovery.    11      
    The   Comte de Paris  , meanwhile, was
continuing its eventful voyage to New Zealand - and not to
Australia.   It was a ship of 550 tons, built as a military
transport ship in the shipyards of Bayonne between 1831 and
1835.   In preparation for the voyage, its keel had been
plated with copper and bronze.   Its overall length was
forty metres and its main mast was 22.5 metres
high.    12       Including both colonists and
crew, there were some ninety people on board.   It carried
so much cargo that some of it was lashed to the deck and
risked getting in the way of crew manoeuvres, according to
Langlois.   This was its first voyage under its own sail and
Captain Langlois was far from happy with its performance.
  Almost immediately there were problems with its steering.
  The island of Palma was sighted on 2 April, and it was
decided to have the rudder looked at there.   This was done
and the opportunity taken to buy fresh food.   The rudder
was declared to be in good order, but when the ship returned
to sea steering remained a serious problem, putting excessive
strain on the masts and sails.  
    Palma was the   Comte de Paris   's last port of
call before reaching New Zealand.   It will be noted that
the ship did not call at St Helena where, according to one
version of the story, it was supposed to have picked up willow
cuttings from Napoleon 's tomb.   The origin of the Akaroa
willows was probably rather less romantic.   Cuttings from
the St Helena willow, usually known as   Salix
napoleona  , were very popular at the time and could be
found everywhere in Europe and America.   In August 1842 the
Superintendent of the Sydney Botanical Gardens even sent
  Salix Bonapartea   cuttings to
Wellington.    13       So there was no
need to call at St Helena to obtain them.   By 24 April,
when a baby 's birth was registered on board the   Comte de
Paris  , it was in the South Atlantic at
30&deg;S., 25&deg;W. (Paris meridian).
  The ship sailed round the Cape of Good Hope, across the
Indian Ocean and then to the south of Australia.   Still
thinking that it was the way the rudder was installed that was
causing the steering problems, Langlois decided to effect
major changes to the way it operated.   This was done at sea
in mid-June when they must have been in the Indian Ocean.
  But this made no difference, and he concluded that it was
the overall design of the ship that was at fault.  
    During the night of the 11-12 July, when the
  Comte de Paris   was south-west of Tasmania
(45&deg;S. and 142&deg;E. of Paris) and the
sea rough and the winds very strong, lightning suddenly hit
the topmast and later in the night the foremast.   Both
times there was considerable damage, but particularly to the
foremast and its chainwales.   Despite repeated warnings
from Belligny, Langlois had not earthed the lightning
conductor fitted to the main mast, even though the ship was
carrying a great deal of gunpowder.   Langlois resented the
underhand way in which Belligny had been brought into the
colonisation venture, supposedly as a neutral scientist but in
fact as Decazes 's prot&eacute;g&eacute;, and
then given considerable authority.   The damage to the ship
was one of the more serious consequences of their inability to
get on together.  
    The South Island of New Zealand was sighted on 8
August, and the next day, unable to enter Akaroa Harbour
because of unfavourable winds, the   Comte de Paris  
entered Pigeon Bay on the north side of Banks Peninsula.
  From their departure from Rochefort on 20 March, they had
taken four and a half months to reach New Zealand.  
    During the voyage, two adult emigrants and one young
girl fell ill and died, and one baby was born.   Brocher
identified the emigrants who died as Jeantrop (an unlikely
spelling) and Girardin.   These correspond to Jotereau and
Chardin in Belligny 's much more reliable list.   Some
colonists were still suffering from Rochefort fever on their
arrival.   However, despite the length of the voyage and the
bad weather they had encountered, most of the emigrants seem
to have lived rather well and to have established good
relations with the officers and crew.   The baby born during
the voyage, Armand Isidore Libeau, was named after the ship 's
second captain, Charles Armand Isidore Desprairies, who became
its godfather.  
      In the conflicts opposing Langlois and Belligny,
the settlers were clearly on Langlois 's side.   As a
gentleman and a scholar, Belligny was the odd man out on the
voyage, although he did have the company of his cousin.
  The emigrants took full advantage of the fact that they
were being fed on the voyage at the state 's expense and Lavaud
was horrified to find how much they had managed to consume.
  Despite the fact that it was mainly the French Government
that was paying for it, the Nanto-Bordelaise Company tried to
hold Langlois personally responsible for 6630   francs'  
worth of excessive consumption of food.   A further
indication of the conviviality reigning on board the
  Comte de Paris   was that, in the course of the
voyage, venereal disease seems to have spread from the crew to
some of the colonists.  
    The   Aube   followed much the same itinerary as
the   Comte de Paris,   calling at Teneriffe, St Louis
du S&eacute;n&eacute;gal and Gor&eacute;e on the West
African coast for fresh supplies and to exchange a sick
officer for another who would be fit for the long voyage.
  From then on, once again, there were no ports of call
until the ship reached New Zealand, for both ships were in a
hurry.   Three members of the crew died during the voyage,
two from accidents, one from meningitis.   The
  Aube   rounded the Cape of Good Hope and headed
eastwards at a latitude of between 40&deg; and
45&deg;S.   It too met with bad weather to the
south of Australia, with strong winds, rain and hail.  
    Lavaud 's instructions regretted that the urgency of
his mission made it necessary for him to go straight to Akaroa
without calling at the Bay of Islands, where he could have
made contact with Bishop Pompallier and obtained the services
of missionaries with a knowledge of the Maori language.
  Despite these instructions, Lavaud decided that it would
be wiser to call first at the Bay of Islands, especially as
the south-easterly winds would have made his projected path
round the south of New Zealand more difficult.   This course
replaced an earlier intention he had during the voyage of
calling briefly at Hobart, where the missionaries could have
embarked on another ship for the Bay of
Islands.    16       He wished to give his
crew much needed rest and fresh food, to get Aimable Langlois
onto dry land as soon as possible because of the bad state of
his health, to take on new supplies before being caught up in
his duties at Akaroa, and to obtain missionaries with local
knowledge, especially as those already on board were not
getting on well together.    17      
    It was on 29 June that, having passed the longitude of
Tasmania, Lavaud set his course for the Bay of Islands.
  Given the direction of the winds, this decision did not
mean that Lavaud had lost a sense of urgency about his
mission.   However, it turned out to be a crucial decision,
one that went against his official instructions and one which
alerted the British authorities in New Zealand to French
intentions.   One can only speculate about what would have
happened if Lavaud had gone directly to the South Island and
set up the French settlement there before making contact with
the British officials in the North Island.   It would
certainly have made it more difficult for the British to
assert their rights without indulging in military
confrontation.   The Three Kings Islands were sighted on 8
July, and the   Aube   came to anchor in the Bay of
Islands during the night of 10-11 July.   Like the
  Comte de Paris  , it had taken 142 days to reach its
first New Zealand port.  
    One member of the   Aube   's crew was suffering
from scurvy by the end of the voyage, and many of them had
soft inflamed gums, but Lavaud was very satisfied with their
general state of health.   There were two doctors on board
and the crew regularly ate raw potatoes to prevent scurvy.
  One of Lavaud 's passengers, Aimable Langlois, was unwell a
lot of the time, however.   The bad weather experienced by
both ships and the sheer length of the voyage had caused the
death of nearly all the farm animals on board.   One cow
died in June, the other cow and the bull soon after the
  Aube   's arrival at the Bay of Islands.   Of all the
animals embarked on the   Aube   and the   Comte de
Paris  , only one hen, one goose and one duck survived.
  However, the care taken with seeds and plants seems to
have been better rewarded.    18      
    While the two French ships were fighting against the
elements, two French naval ships were already at Akaroa in the
course of a voyage round the world.   The
  Astrolabe  , under Captain Dumont d'Urville, entered
Akaroa Harbour on 8 April with great difficulty, followed the
next day by the other ship in his scientific expedition, the
  Z&eacute;l&eacute;e  , under Captain
Jacquinot.   Their visit had nothing whatever to do with the
projected French colonisation of the South Island.   They
had been at sea since September 1837, well before Langlois
began to seek support for his scheme.   The aims of
d'Urville 's expedition, as set out in his instructions, were
scientific and hydrographic, although he was asked to look out
for suitable localities for French whalers, especially around
Cook Strait.    19       When Sir George
Gipps, Governor of New South Wales, heard about French plans
for colonising Banks Peninsula, he reported back to London
that   'the French discovery ships   Astrolabe  
and   Z&eacute;l&eacute;e  , had been at
  Banks'   Peninsula, but made no indications of forming a
settlement there'  .    20    
  However, during the nine days they were in Akaroa,
d'Urville and his officers kept informative journals which
give some insight into what Akaroa was like just before the
French colonists arrived.  
    At Akaroa Dumont d'Urville found an American whaler,
the   Thomas Dickason  , and a French whaler, the
  Gange  , which had both called there for provisions.
  Men from the   Thomas Dickason   went ashore to
shoot pigeons, get water from streams and buy potatoes and
other fresh food.   They were able to obtain fifteen to
twenty bushels of potatoes and a quarter of beef by barter.
  Captain Robin of the   Gange   gave a Maori a
whaleboat, probably in exchange for potatoes.   William
Green, who had been left at Akaroa on 10 November 1839 with
his wife and child and an assistant to manage thirty head of
cattle and five calves for W.B. Rhodes, was very successfully
supplying the ships with butter, cheese, milk and
vegetables.    21       Some sort of commerce
was well under way by early 1840 in Akaroa between those on
shore, both Maori and European, and the visiting ships.  
    A little earlier, in 1838 and 1839, whaling ships
tended to remain in Akaroa Harbour, setting themselves up on
shore and sending their boats outside the heads in search of
whales.   In July 1838, for example, men from the
  Averick Heineken  
    lowered 4 boats pulled out of the bay to look
for whale.   There were 3 American and 3 French ships in the
same bay.   Thursday 12th one of the french ships boats got
one whale.   Friday 13th we went out and the 3rd and 4th
mates boats stayed out until Monday 16th.   We stopped to
the tents that belonged to the american ships.   About 15
miles from the ships this day.      Whales were
towed back into the harbour by the whaleboats to be cut in and
tried out.   And as the   China   was entering Akaroa
Harbour in June 1839, in company with the   Acasta   and
the   Favorite  , Captain Potter saw   'a number
of whaleboats along shore'   waiting, presumably, to
sight a whale and then race out to kill
it.    22      
    During the 1840 season, however, whaling ships seem to
have stayed in Akaroa for a fortnight rather than a month, and
to have used it more for rest and recreation, recruiting,
repairs and supplies.   The ship would be cleaned, painted,
blacked, sometimes careened.   Firewood, water and potatoes
were the most common things obtained from on shore.   But
they would also get timber for spars, rushes, pigeons, green
vegetables, mussels, meat and dairy products.   In 1839,
Hempelman was sending boatloads of potatoes from Peraki to the
whaling ships in Akaroa Harbour, but by 1840 there seemed to
be rather more potatoes grown around Akaroa Harbour
itself.  
    After resting briefly in Akaroa Harbour, whaling ships
in 1840 would go to Peraki for the serious business of bay
whaling.   This is the sort of pattern one sees in the first
half of the year in such ships as the American
  Neptune,   and the French   Ad&egrave;le,
Cosmopolite, Ernest, H&eacute;va   and
  Pauline  .    23       Access to the
sea must have been a lot easier from the smaller bay at
Peraki, although the ships were less sheltered from the stormy
south-westerly winds.   Despite this preference for working
out of Peraki, Akaroa was still visited by a number of ships
before the Nanto-Bordelaise Company 's settlers established
themselves there.   In the first seven and a bit months of
1840, it was visited by 3 men-of-war, 10 French whaling ships,
13 American whaling ships and some coastal traders.   The
seven French whaling ships working in Pegasus Bay out of the
northern bays of Banks Peninsula (Ports Cooper and Levy) seem
to have had little contact with those working out of the
southern bays (Peraki, Akaroa) up until the month of August,
when the   H&eacute;va   and the
  Pauline   moved from Peraki to Port
Cooper.    24       Visiting ships played an
important part in the local economy.   They brought people
and supplies from Sydney or the North Island to the shore
whaling stations and took   illustration  
  caption  
whale oil and bone back there on the return journey.   At
the same time, visiting whaling ships provided a market for
farm products.      

  

  NB this text is bilingual: each section is given first in
Maori, then in English  
  text in Maori    photo    caption  
        Wero (Ritual Challenge)      
    This is a ritual practice which is watched with awe
and anticipation by onlookers.   When the sentinels observe
visitors approaching the marae they sound the conch shell
(p&umacron;t&omacron;rino).   If it happens to
be a very prestigious group, the host people prepare to give
them a resounding welcome.   The first part of the ceremony
consists of sending forth three warriors to challenge the
group according to the following karakia:
      Arise and come forth
  Illustrious offspring of the gods&semi;
  Come forth illustrious ones,
  Come forth illustrious ones&semi;
  Here the token of alertness,
  Here the token of sacredness,
  Here the token of acceptance&semi;
  Reveal your excellence,
  Reveal your power,
  Reveal your sacredness.      
    The first warrior advances, then the second, and
finally the third.   When they jump, prance about and
brandish their fighting weapons with rolling eyes, grimacing
faces and protruding tongues, they engender fear in their
audience.   At this point the third warrior places a token
on the ground in front of the leader of the visiting group.
  This is to determine whether the visitors come as friend
or foe.   If they come in peace, the leader of the group
will pick up the token and the warriors will proceed to lead
the visitors onto the marae.   Simultaneously, the old women
of the marae will begin to give the call of welcome to the
visitors.  
    In the past, however, if the visitors had evil
intentions, they would send their warriors to pursue the host
warriors and to attack them.   But these days there is
little likelihood of this kind of retaliation taking place.
  All visitors come in peace and with goodwill.  
  Text in Maori    photo    caption  
        Whaik&omacron;rero (Formal
Speech-making)      
    Whaik&omacron;rero or formal speech-making is
performed by male elders on the marae and in social
gatherings.   First, there are the speeches of welcome by
the hosts and then the speeches of reply by the visitors.
  In most cases formal speech-making follows a particular
pattern in which certain elements are addressed:
  a ritual chant
acknowledgement of those who have passed on
acknowledgement of the ancestral house
acknowledgement of Mother Earth
speeches to the living
discussion of the purpose for the gathering
conclusion with a song  
  The explanations which follow give a brief summary of each
of the above elements.  
        Ritual chant or Tauparapara:  
  This is a special prayer or chant to the gods which varies
according to the purpose of the gathering.   There are, for
example, chants to dispel evil influences, to alert the
people, and to sanctify them.   But the main chants are to
invoke the protection of the gods and to honour the
visitors.  
      Acknowledgement of the deceased:  
  Regardless of the nature and purpose of a meeting or
gathering the M&amacron;ori always remember the dead.
  To them the dead are still living - grandparents, parents,
relatives, and so forth - in the spirit realm.
  Accordingly, the M&amacron;ori believe that there
is an unbroken link from the gods to past, present, and future
generations.   They say that the spirits of the deceased are
not too far away, that they are in fact still on this earth,
but obscured from the sight of man.   We are unable to see
them because they can't be seen with our physical eyes, and
therefore our eyes are blind in a spiritual sense.   The
living often invite the departed to come forward and support
the happenings of the day.  
      Acknowledgement of the ancestral house:   
  It is customary to name a tribal house after an important
ancestor who has died.   The support posts of the house also
represent important ancestors who bind the generations of the
tribe to one another.   In this part of the
whaik&omacron;rero, indication is given of the
connection between the speaker and the group he represents and
the house and ancestors of the host tribe.   Even though a
house may not be carved, these kinship relationships are still
expressed in honour of the people to whom the house belongs.
  The quality of the house is often, but not always,
indicative of the power and status of the people.  
      Acknowledgement of Mother Earth:     The
speech is then directed to Mother Earth, the mother of all
living things.   Everything that has life was conceived in
the womb of Mother Earth, including mankind.   Man was
fashioned from the earth and will ultimately return to the
earth.   This is the final consummation of man.   All
life-sustaining elements originate in Mother Earth.  
      Speeches to the living:      The main
aim of this part of the speech is to re-establish kinship ties
between the parties.   Perhaps the guiding principle here is
not to offend anyone, but to show respect and to extend a hand
of fellowship in accordance with the following commonly-used
formula:
        Glory to God in the highest,
  Peace on earth,
  Goodwill to all mankind.          
    The important thing to remember is not to offend
people by trampling on their mana, and goodwill should always
prevail.  
        The purpose of the gathering:  
  A speaker is free to vary his remarks at this stage
depending on the nature and purpose of the gathering, but
usually only a brief mention is made of the topic, and further
discussion is reserved until after the formal speech-making is
completed.  
      Song:     After a person has spoken his
group stands to support him with a song.   The purpose of
the song is to add group support to the
whaik&omacron;rero and the purpose of the gathering.
  A song is usually     choosen    chosen    
that is appropriate for the occasion, for example, a dirge for
a funeral service, or a love song for a wedding, but nowadays
there is often a mixture of songs and themes.    
    It should be remembered that while these elements will
usually be present in a whaik&omacron;rero or formal
speech, their order of delivery may be varied.  
  Text in Maori    photo    caption  
      Whakanoa (Free from tapu)    
    Whakanoa is necessary to lift or nullify a tapu.
  It is not appropriate, for example, that a person should
roam the face of the earth after birth and carry the tapu of
creation by the gods.   Shortly after birth a child is taken
to a sacred altar, and there is ritually cleansed by water so
that the tapu of birth does not remain with him or her.
  After this ceremony is completed the child is able to move
freely in the world.  
    There are many other customs and rituals associated
with the whakanoa.   For example, when a new house is opened
the tohunga will whakanoa or nullify the tapu of
T&amacron;ne (god of the forest) from whom the
materials were obtained to build the house.   In this
situation the tohunga uses a twig of the kawakawa tree and as
he performs his incantations he will sprinkle sacred water
onto the floor, walls and posts of the house.  
    In all of these situations there is both a system of
sanctification and of nullification.   Some of the tapu of
the gods is dissipated and the tapu of other gods is
established.  
    Nothing can ever be totally free of all tapu.  
  Text in Maori  
      Whakapapa (Genealogy)    
    Whakapapa is the genealogical descent of all living
things from the gods to the present time.   The meaning of
whakapapa is 'to lay one thing upon another' as, for example,
to lay one generation upon another.   Everything has a
whakapapa: birds, fish, animals, trees, and every other living
thing&semi; soil and rocks and mountains also have a whakapapa.  
    Man also has a genealogy.   Whakapapa is a basis for
the organization of knowledge in respect of the creation and
development of all things.   The word t&amacron;tai
is often used as a synonym for whakapapa.   There is a major
difference, however, in that the word t&amacron;tai
signifies the order and structure of various domains, for
example, the organization of the stars and heavenly bodies,
the organization of the forest, and the organization of the
sea and all the life within it.  
    The t&amacron;tai of human beings often refers
to the actual recital of genealogies rather than the system of
descent from one generation to another.   I have classified
the genealogy of the M&amacron;ori under the following
headings.   First, there is the cosmic genealogy which
concerns the processes of creation of the universe.
  Secondly, there is the genealogy of the gods which
discusses the creation of the gods of man and all organic life
on the earth.   Thirdly, there is the genealogy of the
precursors of man or the primal genealogy, which began with
T&amacron;nenuiarangi and Hineahuone.   Fourth, there
is the genealogy of the canoes which came here from
Hawa&imacron;ki.  
        Cosmic Genealogies:     These
genealogies describe the creation of the foundation of the
universe by Io, the Supreme God.   Iomatua is accorded the
honour of having created all things.   The first genealogies
begin with Te Kore (unorganized potential) and the universe
evolves through various aeons of time and phases of darkness
and light.   The following is a version of an early or
cosmic genealogy.  
  diagram  
      Genealogy of the Gods:     This
genealogy begins when Ranginui, the offspring of light and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, the offspring of
darkness, cohabited and brought forth a number of children.
  These are the main offspring:
T&amacron;whirim&amacron;tea, god of winds,
T&amacron;ne, god of forests, Tangaroa, god of the sea,
Rongomat&amacron;ne, god of the k&umacron;mara
and cultivated crops, Haumia, god of the fernroot and wild
herbs and berries, T&umacron;matauenga, god of war and
precursor of man, and R&umacron;aumoko, god of
earthquakes and volcanoes.   It was through the act of
separating their parents that these children became tutelary
gods of the divisions of nature and the environment.  
      Genealogy of Mortal Man or Primal
Genealogies:     When the children of Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku entered the world of
light and dwelt with their mother
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, they became ira
t&amacron;ngata or mortal beings.   Thus being under
the influence of the course of the physical world, they became
subject to illness and death.   T&amacron;nenuiarangi
was the first man to inhabit this world&semi; he married Hineahuone
(the first woman) and they begat Hinet&imacron;tama.
  T&amacron;ne also cohabited with his daughter,
Hinet&imacron;tama, and they begat children, and these
were the forerunners of all the human inhabitants of the
earth.   Later Hinet&imacron;tama discovered that she
had had an incestuous relationship with her father and she
became so ashamed that she ran off to the depths of the
underworld and there became known as the
Hinenuitep&omacron; or the goddess of death.   After
many generations many of their descendants such as
M&amacron;ui, Hema, T&amacron;whaki, Toi, Ngahue
and Kupe became famous ancestors of the M&amacron;ori,
settling the continents and subsequently the islands of
Polynesia.  
      Genealogy of the Canoes:     After
several voyages to Aotearoa, Kupe returned to the islands and
told his people of the bountiful land that lay in the southern
ocean.   Now there was some strife and war in Hawaiiki over
food resources and a sizable group of people decided that they
should migrate to Aotearoa.   After they arrived here, they
settled the whole of the country and were a prosperous people
well adapted to the new land at the time the
P&amacron;keh&amacron; arrived.   Many
M&amacron;ori people can trace their genealogies back
to the paramount chiefs of the great fleet of canoes and to
ancestors who inhabited other islands of the
Pacific.    
    It is through genealogy that kinship and economic ties
are cemented and that the mana or power of a chief is
inherited.   Whakapapa is one of the most prized forms of
knowledge and great efforts are made to preserve it.   All
the people in a community are expected to know who their
immediate ancestors are, and to pass this information on to
their children so that they too may develop pride and a sense
of belonging through understanding the roots of their
heritage.  
  photo    caption  
  Text in Maori    diagram    caption  
      Whare Whakairo (Carved Ancestral
House)    
    Although the whare whakairo was originally constructed
after the bodily form of our primeval parents, Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, in their nuptial
embrace, it has become more popular in contemporary thinking
to regard the whare whakairo as representing important tribal
ancestors.   The main ridge pole (t&amacron;huhu),
the rafters (heke), and the barge boards (maihi) represent the
backbone, the ribcage and the outstretched arms of an
ancestor.   The tekoteko or carved figure on the front gable
of a house represents the ancestor whose name the house bears.
  However, the structure of the house symbolizes the state
in which Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku and their children
dwelt together in the spirit realm when conflict began to
arise.   The earthen floor of the house is
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku or Earth Mother, and
the posts (poupou) represent the children poised in the act of
separating their parents.  
    When M&amacron;ori people assemble on the
marae, and especially in the whare whakairo, they are, in
essence, returning to their roots and to the source of their
being.   They congregate in the bosom of the house to be
instructed on tribal matters and to be rejuvenated in spirit
by being among the spirits of their ancestors and gods.
  Many M&amacron;ori will travel from miles around on
the occasion of the death of kin or to participate in some
other hui or meeting.   When they enter the whare whakairo
they cut themselves off from the world outside and are
revitalized, returning to the outside world with a new zest
for life.  
    The doorway of the house is a significant feature of
the building.   It represents the threshold between two
states: the world of gloom within the house, and the
aom&amacron;rama outside.   The door symbolizes a
change of state as one emerges from the main body of the house
and enters the world outside.   It is the threshold
separating the sacred and the profane, and the door lintel is
often carved in motifs representing the vagina, thus
emphasizing the passage from the world of confinement into the
world of light.   The window of the house represents a
primitive archetype.   The window opening or fissure
symbolizes the opening through which the children of Rangi and
Papa perceived the light of the outside world and wanted to
possess it.   The house is sited so that it faces
north-east, towards the rising sun.   This too is symbolic
of moving from the world of confinement and suspended
animation into a world of light.   As the sun rises in the
morning its light enters the small aperture or window, just as
the children of Rangi and Papa perceived the first light from
within the bosom of their parents.  
    The idea of thresholds and changes of state is also
represented within the house in the pout&amacron;huhu
(alternatively referred to as poum&amacron;rama) and
the poutuarongo.   The pout&amacron;huhu is set at
the front of the house, on the right side of the door as one
enters.   It represents the initial upward thrust as
T&amacron;ne pushed apart Rangi and Papa, and
symbolizes the light or the pathway to the gods.   The
poutuarongo, which is situated at the extreme rear of the
house, at the end of the t&amacron;huhu or ridge pole,
represents the threshold between life and death.   This is
one of the reasons that Ng&amacron;puhi place the
coffins containing their deceased in the house at the base of
the poutuarongo.  
    The symbolism of death within the house is also
illustrated by the tradition of passing the coffin through the
window of the house rather than through the door.   It will
be recalled that the children of Rangi and Papa first saw the
light of the outside world through their mother 's armpit.
  Later on they chose to enter the outside world through the
doorway or pathway which was made by the separation of their
parents.   Therefore, the idea of entering or exiting
through the doorway is symbolic of entering death again,
rather than entering a new state of life.   The wairua of
the deceased lives on, and returns to the spirit world.
  The practice of passing the corpse through the window
signifies the freedom of the spirit to travel without
encumbrance in that sacred realm as did the gods in their
original spiritual creation.  
    In modern times, the concept of the whare whakairo has
been extended to include the 'house' or territory of the
tribe.   For example, in defining the boundaries of
Ng&amacron;puhi-nui-tonu, the t&amacron;huhu of
the territory extends from the Pout&amacron;huhu at
Tamaki to the Poutuarongo at Te Rerenga Wairua in the Far
North.   The maihi of the house extend into the boundaries
of Te Aupouri, Te Rarawa, Ng&amacron;ti Kahu,
Ng&amacron;puhi and Ng&amacron;ti
Wh&amacron;tua.   The poupou which extend to the
heavens above are the famous mountains of the Tai Tokerau,
such as Maunga Piko, Te Ramaroa, Maunga Taniwha, Te
R&amacron;kaumangamanga, Maunga Rei and Titirangi.
  The papararo or floor is called Te Hiku o te Ika a
M&amacron;ui.   When one enters these tribal
territorial boundaries one is said to enter into the sacred
house of Ng&amacron;puhi-nui-tonu, and therefore, to
come under the influence of the gods and customs belonging to
the tribal group.   One experiences a certain healing
influence or a sense of well-being when one operates within
one 's tribal boundaries.  
    And so it happens on many occasions when
M&amacron;ori visit their places of birth or
upbringing, that they experience a rejuvenation of spirit and
a     herapeutic    therapeutic     restoration of
their total health (physical, mental, and spiritual) and are
ready to face the challenges of life once more.   To return
to one 's birthplace and to participate in discussion with
elders in the presence of the ancestors and the gods is
something equivalent to the Christian practice of attending
church, where one expects to be uplifted and feel peace of
mind through worship.  
    When a new house is to be dedicated, the tohunga
gather the chips (from the carvings) and earth (from the
foundation posts) and use them in the dedicatory ceremonies.
  A handful of earth is scattered on the marae
&amacron;tea and about the house, and prayers are
offered to appease R&umacron;aumoko, god of
earthquakes.   The chips from the carvings are scattered
about in the house and the carvings, and prayers are offered
to T&amacron;ne, god of the forests.   Prayers are
also offered to other nature gods (including
T&amacron;whirim&amacron;tea, god of the winds,
storms and tempests) so that the house may stand firm against
the forces of nature.   Kawakawa leaves are used in this
ritual.  
    According to my elders, when a house was dedicated the
priests would go to the local burial ground in the early dawn
and retrieve a small portion of soil and/or a special artifact
and bring them to the house.   They would then bless the
house and place the soil or treasure by the poutokomanawa or
main post to represent the receptacle for the mauri of the
house.   The reason for this custom was to attract the mana
and sacred influence of the ancestors who had passed on into
the spirit realm.   They would also light a special fire
which represented the manawa ora or life-giving energy of the
house.   It was also a symbol of the ahik&omacron;mau
or sacred power of the gods.   In ancient times, it was only
those who were ritually prepared at the sacred altars who were
permitted to enter the whare maihi or sacred carved house.  
    Finally, the carved house is a symbol of the prestige,
power, and industriousness of a tribe.   There are many such
houses being built today, a practice which is indicative of
the renaissance going on in the M&amacron;ori world,
and the revival of many traditional cultural
practices.    
  

      Waitangi: Treaty and Tribunal    
    GARTH CANT  
    Land rights and the relationships between indigenous
peoples and later arrivals have become significant items on the
political agendas of a number of countries including New Zealand,
Australia and Canada.   In all cases legal concepts to do with
human rights and aboriginal title have cumulated to the point where
indigenous land rights can be established with or without reference
to treaties signed by the British Crown and indigenous peoples
(McHugh 1983&semi; Kawharu 1989).   In the New Zealand case we have a
treaty which spelt out the rights and obligations of the Crown and
the Maori tribes.   The Treaty of Waitangi, signed in good faith
by both parties in 1840, has become the basis for working
relationships between Crown and Maori people in the 1980s.  
    As a result of the Treaty of Waitangi, and ongoing
clarifications of its status, we are in a position to see ourselves
as two peoples, occupying the same land and depending on the same
resources, linked together by a Treaty which defines resource
relationships and provides a common citizenship.   In the 1980s
a number of people and institutions are at work sorting out the
facts and the implications of this shared resources/shared
citizenship equation.   Foremost among them are historians,
members of the Waitangi Tribunal, judges of the High Court and the
Court of Appeal and members of Government including the Minister
for the Environment (Geoffrey Palmer).   The Treaty of Waitangi
provides the basis for a bicultural partnership and the Waitangi
Tribunal is one of the key institutions charged with sorting out
the details of this partnership.  
    Claudia Orange has written a substantive history, a short
but pertinent discussion paper addressed to resource managers and
a short introductory overview (Orange 1987, 1988).   She helps me
to organise our history in this way (Figure 1).   The years about
1840 represent the context in which the Treaty had its birth and
was put in place&semi; the years round about 1975 and 1985 are those
when the Tribunal was put in place and commenced its task.   In
between, from the 1860s to the 1930s, are the years during which
  pakeha   New Zealand suffered a loss of memory with regard
to the Treaty (Orange 1988, 2).  
    The British Government had strong reasons for seeking a
Treaty in 1840.   Claudia Orange characterises these as legal,
diplomatic and political.   The legal relates to the fact that
the British had recognised Maori sovereignty in the 1830s - in
particular in March 1834 when a national flag, provided by the
British and selected from a choice of three by the Northern Chiefs,
was hoisted at Waitangi in the presence of Maori chiefs and
European observers and given a 21 gun salute by   HMS
Alligator  .   The second was diplomatic - a number of other
nations, especially the French, were showing interest in
establishing settlements in New Zealand.  
    The third set of reasons was political.   Atrocities in
Tasmania, carried out under official instruction, were widely
publicised in Britain (Ryan 1981).   As a result the Aborigines
Protection Society and the Missionary lobbies within Britain were
strongly supported by public opinion.   The British Government
was strongly motivated to establish British rule in New Zealand and
their misadventures in Australia ensured that it was done in a
negotiated manner.  
    Captain Hobson R.N. came to the Bay of Islands in 1840 with
instructions to obtain a Treaty.   The texts of the Treaty were
worked out by Hobson, British Resident Busby and Missionary
Williams and a meeting called of all the Chiefs and tribes who were
available in the North (Figure 2).   The terms of the Treaty were
explained in Maori on February 5th, debated through the night by
the Maori tribes and agreed to on February 6th when some 46
  Rangatira   signed on behalf of their   iwi   and
  hapu  .   Copies were then made and dispatched to all
parts of the country from Muriwhenua in the North to Ruapuke Island
in Foveaux Strait.  
    Most of the coastal tribes, including Ngai Tahu in the
South, signed.   Significantly there was unwillingness on the
part of a number of important inland tribes to sign - no further
signatures were obtained from Waikato, Arawa, Tuwharetoa or
Tuhoe.  
    As a result of the Treaty the British had the right to
govern   (kawanatanga),   to set up an administration and
bring in settlers.   Their administration had the right to buy
any lands which Maori wanted to sell.   (Copies of the two texts,
in English and in Maori, are available from many sources including
Orange, 1987.   For an authoritative English translation of the
Maori text see Kawharu, 1989, 319-321.)  
    On the Maori side lands, forests, fisheries, food gathering
places and other special properties   (taonga)   were
preserved.   Maori tribes were to retain full chieftainship
  (rangatiratanga)   over these properties.   In addition
Maori people were given the full rights and duties of citizenship
as the people of England.  
    The Treaty was recognised as a basis for a working
partnership between Maori and Crown and European settlement
proceeded in this context in the 1840s and 1850s.   By the 1860s
the situation changed.   Political control passed from London to
the New Zealand Assembly located first in Auckland, then in
Wellington.   Maori (along with women) were effectively excluded
from participation in Government by the franchise which was
restricted to males who owned property as individuals.   The
priorities of successive settler Governments were to assert
 'sovereignty' at the expense of   'rangatiratanga'   and
obtain large areas of land for European settlement.   These
priorities were achieved by military and legislative actions
(Belich, 1986&semi; Ward  ,   1973&semi; Orange, 1987).  
    From 1860 onwards Government recruited troops and fought
wars against Maori tribes in Taranaki, Waikato, Bay of Plenty and
Poverty Bay.   Legislation was passed to support the wars and
link them to the confiscation of Maori lands.   Each war was
fought on a cost-plus basis.   Settler militia, Maori militia and
immigrants were recruited to supplement Imperial troops in
sufficient numbers to ensure victory.   Once Government forces
won (or in the case of the campaign against Te Kooti reached a
stalemate), the costs of the war were tallied up and sufficient
land was compensated to reward the militia and meet other
expenses.  
    What the wars began, legislation completed.   Tribal
ownership of land and access to fisheries and other resources were
progressively abolished.   By the turn of the century most of the
best land had passed out of Maori hands and the economic base of
every tribe had been substantially depleted.  
    European New Zealanders, legislators and Attorneys General
suffered a loss of memory about the Treaty.   Maori did not.
  They launched petition after petition and took court action
after court action through the period (see especially Orange, 1987,
Chapter 9,   The quest for lost rights)  .  
    Recovery of pakeha awareness dates from the 1930s when a
political alliance was formed between the Ratana Party and the
Labour Party.   Since that time, change has been slow but
cumulative.   The Maori contribution during World War II, the
growth and urbanisation of the Maori population and the global
upsurge of interest in human rights have all played their part.
  figure 1  
From 1935 onwards successive Governments, Labour and National, were
strongly supportive of greater equity for Maori but expressed this
support in assimilationist and monocultural ways.  
    In the 1970s the Treaty House at Waitangi and the February
6th celebrations became a focal point for challenges to Government
policies and to monocultural values (National Council of Churches
1983).   In 1975 the Labour Government, with Norman Kirk as Prime
Minister and Matiu Rata as   Minita Maori,   passed the
  Treaty of Waitangi Tribunal Act  .   A substantial
mechanism was put in place to investigate current policies and
actions of the Crown.   What Labour began the National Party has
continued.  
    The Waitangi Tribunal established in 1975 was enlarged in
1985 and again in 1989.   It has heard a sequence of claims
beginning in Taranaki in 1983 and including Ngai Tahu in 1988 and
1989 (Figure 3).   Factual and legal insights have been
accumulating with each finding and have flowed on to other legal
and policy arenas (Sorenson, 1987).   The first two findings,
from Motunui in Taranaki and the Kaituna River in the Bay of Plenty
were concerned with water pollution and the impact of this on the
fisheries and the   mana   of the people who were the
guardians of these natural resources.   The Manukau claim was
large and wideranging&semi; it involved the guardianship of the Manukau
Harbour and the impact of urban and industrial development on the
Maori communities which lived on its shores and depended on its
resources.   Te Reo Maori was a national claim which identified
Maori language as one of the   taonga   identified in Article
2 of the Treaty.   The Waiheke Island and the Orakei findings in
1987 both identified injustices relating to loss of land by the
Ngati Paoa and the Ngati Whatua tribes in the vicinity of Auckland
City.   In 1988 the Tribunal brought down the first part of its
findings on the Muriwhenua claim in the far North and began to hear
the large and complex Ngai Tahu claim in the South Island (Evison,
1986, 1988).  
    Instead of commenting briefly on each of these major claims
I will select one of special interest in 1988 and 1989 as an
example.  
      THE MURIWHENUA FISHERIES CLAIM    
    The fisheries portion of the Muriwhenua claim was heard in
1986 and 1987 and the finding brought down in 1988.   The claim
was brought by the five Muriwhenua Tribes: tribes who in terms of
Maori geography live at the tail of   Te Ika a Maui   (Figure
4a) far removed from the goings on in the power centre at Te Upoko
o te Ika.   In terms of   pakeha   geography the area
concerned is the northern portion of the Northland Peninsula
(Figure 4b).   Both geographical imageries emphasise the very
significant interdependence between land and sea in this
region.  
  The Muriwhenua claim has two strands, one to do with land, the
other to do with fisheries.   Events within and beyond Muriwhenua
gave urgency to the fisheries portion of the claim (it may be some
time in 1990 that the land claim hearings are resumed).   There
were two key questions raised by the Muriwhenua Fisheries claim:
1. who owns the fish in the sea?
  2. If Maori have fishing rights as a result of the Treaty are
these (a) traditional and non commercial or (b) traditional and
commercial?  
    The answers to these questions are provided partly by the
Treaty text and partly by the evidence about Maori fishing prior to
and about the year 1840.   The evidence of the text is in the
texts of the Treaty.   In article 2 the tribes are given
  'full exclusive and undisturbed possession of their lands
estates forests fisheries and other properties for so long as it is
their wish and desire to retain the same'  .   In the years
since 1840 there were many land purchases and some of these
specified forests and minerals which went with particular pieces of
land.   There were very few, if any, purchases of fisheries.
  In 148 years between the Treaty and the Muriwhenua finding the
Crown did nothing to purchase fisheries from Maori tribes.   The
evidence from the text of the Treaty was clear and the chance for
the Crown or other parties to give evidence of any subsequent sales
of fisheries was not taken up.   The finding is clear: Maori
tribes have not sold the fisheries which they used in the
1830s.  
    The great wealth of evidence considered by the Tribunal
related to the nature and extent of Maori fisheries: the range and
variety of fish caught and the scale and complexity of the economic
organisation involved.   Three sorts of evidence, each quite
separate, mesh together to confirm a similar picture.  
      Archaeological Evidence:   Many shells and
fishbones are big enough and robust enough to survive for
centuries.   Fish caught at sea were eaten on shore and the
remains accumulated in rubbish heaps which became  'middens' beloved
of archaeologists.   From these middens scientists like Dr Janet
Davidson of the Auckland Institute and Dr Atholl Anderson of the
University of Otago are able to work out what fish were caught,
where and in what quantities (Davidson, 1984&semi; Anderson, 1987).  
      Contemporary European Observers:   Documentation of
European observations began with Tasman and became much more
detailed when Cook 's scientific team arrived in 1769.   Joseph
Banks, for example, made entries in his diary when the
  Endeavour   was at the Bay of Islands on 4th and 5th
December 1769.   English and Maori fishers compared equipment and
catches.   Banks records the Maori reaction to the gear carried
by the   Endeavour:  
      ... after having a little laught at our sein
(the Maori) shewd us one of theirs which was 5 fathom deep and its
length we could only guess, as it was not stretchd out,
  figure 2  
but it could not from its bulk be less than 4 or 500 fathom
(700-900 metres).   Fishing seems to be the cheif business of
this part of the countrey&semi; about all their towns are abundance of
netts laid upon small heaps like hay cocks and thatchd over and
almost every house you go into has netts in its making (Waitangi
Tribunal, 1988, 42, quoting from Beaglehole, 1955, 1,
444).        
    Savage in 1806 and Nicholas in 1814 added more detail.
  Nicholas, for example, noted that   'their nets are much
larger than that made use of in Europe'   and one of them
   'very often gives employment to a whole village'  
(Waitangi Tribunal, 1988, 43).   De Roux, an ensign on a French
ship which visited in 1772, recorded Maori fishing nets 140 to 180
metres long and 1.5 to 2 metres deep.   Colenso sums up fishing
about 1840 in these terms:
        They (the Maori) were very great consumers
of fish ... The seas around their coasts swarmed with excellent
fish and crayfish&semi; the rocky and sandy shores abounded with good
shellfish ... The rivers and lakes contained ... plenty of small
fish and fine mussels and small crayfish&semi; the marshes and swamps
were full of large rich eels ... In seeking all of these, they knew
the proper seasons when, as well as the best manner how, to take
them ... Sometimes they would go in large canoes to a deep
sea-fishing, to some well known shoal or rock, 5 to 10 miles from
the shore and return with a quantity of large cod, snapper, and
other prime fish&semi; sometimes they would use very large drag nets,
and enclose great numbers of grey mullet, dogfish, mackerel and
other fish which swim in shoals&semi; of which (especially of dogfish
and of mackerel) they dried immense quantities for winter use
(Waitangi 
  Figure 3  
Tribunal, 1988, 44, citing Colenso, 1868,
9).        
    These sorts of evidence - from scientists and historians -
were familiar ground for a legal tribunal.   The next strand was
very different.  
      Oral evidence from Kaumatua:   A very large map of
Muriwhenua showing land features in detail and the sea as blank was
put up.   Maori   Kaumatua   (Elders) came forward one by
one to share knowledge handed down through the generations.
  Each shared the knowledge of their own   hapu   or
subtribe: when they fished&semi; where they fished&semi; for what species&semi;
with what gear.   The location of each fishery was described by
reference to landmarks on shore.   As they spoke each location
was plotted on the blank map and at the end of the evidence all of
the significant fishing areas had been filled in.   The final
report summed up their contribution in these terms:
        The libraries of their minds are replete
with an enormous treasure trove of ancient practices, customs,
beliefs and laws telling of the huge reliance upon the seas in days
gone by.   Several hundred fishing grounds were named and
identified in detail, up to 25 miles at sea, with descriptions
given of their locations as fixed by cross bearings from the land,
the fish species associated with each, and the times to fish there.
  It was soon obvious to us, from the spread of such grounds,
that Muriwhenua fishermen had worked the whole of the inshore seas
and that all workable depths were known (Waitangi Tribunal, 1988,
xiv).        
      These three strands of evidence meshed together
exactly.   As a result the nature and extent of Maori fishing
before and after the Treaty were spelt out.  
    The evidence as it was presented, and the findings of the
Tribunal when they were brought down in 1988, caused flurries of
excitement among commercial fishermen, Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries and Government.   Maori were clearly entitled to sea
fisheries.   Maori had been progressively excluded by legislation
and actions of the Crown from the 1860s onwards.   The most
significant injustice of all came from the system of Individual
Transferable Quotas (ITQs) introduced in 1986 as a management tool
designed to prevent overfishing.   ITQs, designed to control the
total harvest of each specie, were allocated to commercial
fishermen who could document a substantial catch history during the
previous four or five seasons.  
    The Tribunal acknowledged that the intentions were good and
then highlighted the impact of the decision on Maori:
        ... the by-catch was to privatise the
greater part of the fishing resource, and to gift property rights,
of some value, to those who had been responsible for overfishing.
  figure 4  
  The value of the exclusive rights of commercial fishing so far
apportioned to individual fishermen is worth over one billion
dollars on the quota exchange.   The annual rental return to the
Crown is currently some $21 million (Waitangi Tribunal, 1988,
xx).        
    The introduction of ITQs caused special hardship in
Muriwhenua where land resources were used in conjunction with
fishing.   Most Muriwhenua fishermen combined fishing with
farming and most combined fishing for home consumption with fishing
for the local market.   Most quotas were allocated to commercial
fishing boats operating from larger ports outside of Muriwhenua.
  The final irony was that the ITQ system effectively excluded
most Muriwhenua fishermen from commercial fishing.  
    The findings of the Tribunal were clear.   As it is
presently arranged the Quota Management System is contrary to the
Treaty.   Government and Maori Tribes must sit down, in equal
numbers, on opposite sides of the negotiating table and work out a
basis for the future.   This process is ongoing: there have been
extended negotiations during 1988 and 1989 and the Fisheries Bill
is working its way through Select Committee stages.   At the same
time the Fishing Industry Board and the Fishing Industry
Association have appealed to the High Court against the findings of
the Waitangi Tribunal on Muriwhenua Fisheries.  
      CONCLUSION    
    The Tribunal in its membership and style of working models
a bicultural partnership.   Its major contributions are
threefold: it provides a way of sorting out grievances which have
festered for up to 150 years&semi; it enables Maori insights into
conservation and resource management to find their way into
environmental and planning law&semi; its findings challenge Government
to restore to Maori tribes the type of economic base which will
enable them to participate fully in the New Zealand economy of the
future.      
  

          CHAPTER 2 Perception of risk      
        2.1 Risk      
    Risks can be described as the   "quantitative
measure of hazard consequences"   (Gough, 1988, p.8).
  Four different evaluations of future risk can be
identified (Starr   et     al  ., 1976, p.629).
    (1)   Real risk   is determined by
future circumstances when they eventually occur or develop
fully.
  (2)   Statistical risk   is determined by
currently available historical data, typically measured
actuarilly (for insurance purposes).   It is based on
observed frequencies which can be evaluated by normal
statistical means.
  (3)   Predicted risk   is predicted analytically
from systems models structured from historical data.
  (4)   Perceived risk   is seen intuitively by
individuals.    
    Technical interpretations use statistical measures of
risk and formal methods of risk evaluation.   Flood
magnitude and flood frequency are of particular importance in
determining the future probabilities of flood risk.
  However, public perceptions of risk (covers beliefs
regarding likelihood of occurrence and causality, as well as
evaluations of risk) often diverge from these 'technical
frameworks'.  
    Burton and Kates (1964, p.417) identify this
  "hiatus between popular perception of hazard and the
technical-scientific perception.   To many flood-plain
users, floods are preventable, i.e. flood control can
completely eliminate the hazard.   Yet the technical expert
knows that except for very small drainage areas no flood
control works known can effectively prevent the flood-inducing
concentration of precipitation, nor can they effectively
control extremely large floods of very rare
occurrence."    
        2.2 Influences on risk perception      
    Perception, or social perception specifically, is
  "the process by which a person gives meaning to what
they see... (It) is the filter through which the external
environment is given meaning by a person"   (Ericksen,
1986, p.39).   Factors that influence the process include
past experiences&semi; existing attitudes, values and motivation&semi;
personality&semi; and future expectations.   These are shaped by
social and cultural conditions such as family, education,
occupation, religion, and age (Ibid.).  
    Ericksen (Ibid., p.40) suggests that, based on the
findings of past research, four main factors can influence lay
perception of hazards (in this case flooding):
    (1)   knowledge   and   past
experience   of the event&semi;
  (2) interpretation of various physical characteristics of
the hazard, including flood   magnitude   and
  frequency&semi;  
  (3)   geographical situation   of the floodplain
occupant&semi; i.e.   urban   or   rural&semi;  
  (4)   personality traits.      
    Interviews carried out by the East Cape Catchment
Board (1987, p.3) with residents of Opotiki found a general
lack of     knowledge     of the statistical
meaning of the so-called 100-year flood&semi; only 15% of those
interviewed appeared to understand.   The Board is working
on an initiative to describe flood risk in terms of the 50%
probability concept and not that of  'return periods'.  
    Residents of Paeroa also demonstrated an erroneous or
inadequate understanding of the  'return period' concept
used by technical experts.   Over 42% of those interviewed
implied that it meant     "  a regular
cycle"   (Erickson, 1986, p.44).  
    Research indicates that there is a dominant
relationship between     past
experience     and expectation of future flood
events&semi; a greater past experience is more likely to yield more
accurate views of the probabilities of past and future flood
distributions.   The town of Opotiki has experienced
extensive flooding on a number of occasions (Ericksen, 1986,
p.42).   A recent study (East Cape Catchment Board,
1988) showed that 78% of those interviewed considered the
flood risk of Opotiki to be medium to high, and 74% consider
it is likely Opotiki will be flooded within the next 50
years.  
    However there are important exceptions to this rule.
   Erickson (Ibid., p.44) discusses interviews carried out
in Paeroa after a recent flood experience.   Forty-four
percent did not expect flooding to occur again&semi; most of these
people implied it was a 'freak' experience yet a scientist 's 
estimate was that there was a 14% chance of recurrence in a
10-year period.  
    Factors such as the     magnitude    
and     frequency     of past flooding and how
that affected the individual in a temporal and spatial manner
can influence and distort a person 's perception of past events
(Ibid., p.40).   Ericksen reports on risk perception of two
flood-prone communities&semi; Greymouth and Opotiki.   It appears
that people who are exposed to relatively frequent flood
experiences have reduced expectations of larger future events
(Ibid., pp.41-42).  
    Research into the 1974 Brisbane floods found that
after 14 months the usual fading of memory and the development
of consensus interpretations of the disaster distorted
  victims'   views (Luketina, 1985, p.31).  
    Ericksen (1986, p.42) refers to the notion of
'gambler 's fallacy' that affects lay perception of flooding.
  It assumes the reduced likelihood of an event
happening in any one year if it has happened the previous
year.   In contrast, scientists view floods as random events
that have the same probability of happening in one year as the
next.   Ericksen suggests that this fallacy might be more
prevalent in areas of infrequent flooding.  
    Where the event is infrequent, failure to perceive a
significant hazard is widely shared (Burton and Kates, 1964,
p.429).  
    Studies by Burton and Kates (1964, p.428) suggest that
    urban   and   rural    
floodplain users display different perceptions of the flood
hazard.   Agricultural land users exhibit a greater hazard
sensitivity in terms of awareness.   Erickson compares
perceptions of rural and urban floodplain occupants.   He
has found that closeness to nature tends to align farmers more
closely to scientists in their views of flooding (Ericksen
1986, p.40).  
    The fourth factor, that is,     personality
traits    , affects the attitudes people have towards
natural events.   These include   "attitudes towards
fate (ranging from  'disasters are acts of God' to 'individuals
create disasters')&semi; belief in the efficacy of Government
acting (ranging from 'the catchment board will solve the
flooding' to the need for personal action): views of
people-nature relationships (including dominance, harmony, and
subjugation)&semi; and risk-taking behaviour"   (Ibid.,
p.9).    
      2.3 Technological solutions    
    Public perceptions may contain contradictions and
inconsistencies.   Burton and Kates (1964, p.432) point to
the widespread belief in the technical engineering solutions
to problems of hazards.   Optimism about the recurrence of
future floods may correlate with knowledge and familiarity
with flood protection works.   People are lulled into a
false sense of security without realising that structures are
built to withhold a specific flood capacity.   Problems
occur when the design capacity is exceeded by an infrequent
event.  
    Ericksen (1986, pp.43-44) refers to studies carried
out on flood-prone communities in New Zealand.   In
Otorohanga, a small community on the floodplain of the Waipa
River, it was found that 13 years after a major flood, no-one
expected a future flood.   Half of those interviewed held
this view because of confidence in stop bank protection
completed in response to the previous major flood.  
    Luketina (1985, p.11) reviews studies of flood hazard
perceptions.   Research indicates that even when people are
informed of the hazard-prone nature of their locality they
appear to deny the danger.   Responses indicate an "it won't
happen here" attitude.   In cases of denial it cannot be
assumed that attempts to raise the hazard consciousness of the
general public will have the desired effect.  
      2.4 Perceptions of past and future
risk    
    The main factors that can influence flood risk
perception tested in the survey were: knowledge and past
experience of the event, geographical situation of the
floodplain, and personality traits.  
    The order of the results and discussion relating to
this section differs from the questionnaire format&semi; it was
suggested at the questionnaire design stage that a less
demanding section at the beginning could encourage people to
respond more readily.  
    All tables marked with an * indicate
  respondents'   first choice where they were asked to
rank options.   Some gave more than one first choice&semi; this
accounts for why some percentage totals exceed 100
slightly.  
      2.4.1     Perceptions of past and
future risk - findings    
    These questions investigate the public perception of
risk from flooding of the Waimakariri River as a past and
future problem, and possible influences upon that
perception.  
    Question D.2.   When asked to indicate how safe
respondents felt from the risk of flooding from the
Waimakariri over the   last   five years, they were
given a scale of discrete categories from 'completely safe' to
'at extreme risk'.  
  table 2.1 Perception of past risk  
    D.3.   The most frequent reasons given by those who
felt completely safe or safe included -
  table 2.2 Why safe in past?  
  Those who felt at risk or at extreme risk did so because -
  table 2.3 Why at risk in past?    
    D.4.       "How safe do you think your
property is from the risk of flooding from the Waimakariri
over the   next   10 years?"    
  table 2.4 Perception of future risk    
    D.5.   Reasons given for feelings of safety or
complete safety were -
  table 2.5 Why safe in future?    
    Those who felt at risk or at extreme risk did so
because -
  table 2.6 Why at risk in future?    
    D.6.       "In your opinion, how likely is
it that a major flood by the Waimakariri will cause
significant damage to the greater Christchurch urban area
within the next 30 years?"    
  table 2.7 Perception of future risk to greater
Christchurch urban area    
      2.4.2 Perceptions of past and future risk -
discussion    
    Seventy-two per cent of ratepayers surveyed have felt
safe or completely safe from flooding of the Waimakariri over
the past five years.   Only 7% perceived themselves to be at
moderate or extreme risk in the past.  
    Comments from those who perceived themselves to have
been safe in the past included reference to large upper basins
combined with stopbanks, the capacity of the river to cope
with large volumes of water, protection received from
stopbanks, faith in engineers and no previous problems.
  Those on the north side believed they were favoured by
height above sea level.  
    Those who felt they were at risk believed that high
water levels had been reached at times, a build up of shingle
exacerbated flooding problems, there were limitations on the
height of stopbanks, a 100-year flood would overtop the
stopbanks, and that the 'greenhouse effect' and depletion of
the ozone layer were causing increased rainfall.  
    Perceptions changed with regard to personal risk of
flooding over the next 10 years.   Fifty-eight per cent felt
they were safe or completely safe while 9% believed they faced
moderate to extreme risk in the future.   Thirty-three per
cent took a neutral position or did not know whether they
faced a personal risk of flooding.   Reasons given for these
perceptions were similar to those given by respondents when
offering their perceptions of whether or not they perceived
that they had faced a past risk.   Those who were optimistic
believed that measures had already been taken, they were
well out of the flood path, providence would prevail, and that
there had been no major flooding of the Waimakariri during the
past 75 years.  
    Those who perceived a future risk offered reasons such
as increasing rainfall attributable to the 'greenhouse effect'
and depletion of the ozone layer, few measures (preventative
presumably) were being taken, we are unable to predict future
happenings/events, that is, the unpredictability of nature,
and the fact that the river has been very close to breaking
its banks every year.  
    Forty-one percent perceived that flooding of the
greater Christchurch Urban Area is an improbability or highly
improbable during the next 30 years.   Twenty-four percent
believed that it was probable or very probable, 24% took a
neutral position while 11% did not know.   Reasons for these
views were not solicited.  
    The weighted mean value falls over time from 4.1 for
past risk to 3.9 for future risk (see Tables 2.1 and 2.4).
  Although the weighted mean value for risk to the greater
Christchurch urban area during the next 30 years is 2.8 (Table
2.7), it would actually equate with 3.3 if the options ranged
from 5 to 1. and not 1 to 5.   In other words, while the
weighted mean tends towards the  'safe' end of the scales in
these three tables, people appear to feel less confident
towards future risk than this result suggests.   A greater
degree of uncertainty is also expressed over time: 21%
indicated a neutral (indicated by the number 3 on the scale)
or  'don't know' position regarding past risk, as did 33%
regarding safety over the next 10 years, and 35% over the next
30 years.  
      2.5 Factors influencing risk
perception    
    The next sections explore the relationships underlying
the responses to questions on perceived risk.  
      2.5.1 Past experience of flooding    
    Question C.1 investigated how long the respondents had
lived at their present site on the floodplain.  
  table 2.8 Length of occupancy on floodplain  
    Questions C.2 and C.3 enquired whether respondents had
experienced flooding of the Waimakariri River at their present
site and/or whether they had personal experience of their
property being flooded elsewhere in New Zealand.  
  table 2.9 Past riverine flooding experience  
    C.4.   When inquiring about the number of years
since the respondent had last experienced flooding the
following results were obtained.  
  table 2.10 Years since past flooding experience  
  table 2.11 Perceived risk in past by Waimakariri flood
experience  
  table 2.12 Perceived risk in future by Waimakariri flood
experience  
      2.5.2 Past experience of flooding -
discussion    
    It was found that floodplain residents who have
experienced flood damage are more likely to view flooding as a
past and future problem than floodplain residents who have
not experienced     damaged    damage     by
flooding.  
    Only 15% of respondents have lived on the Waimakariri
floodplain for more than 30 years (the river last flooded in
1957).   One third have owned property there for five years
or fewer.   Five per cent of respondents claimed to have
been flooded by the Waimakariri River in the past.  
    A check of some of the   respondents'  
locality and length of occupation on the floodplain showed a
lack of correlation.   This could be attributable to
occupation of a different property previously, or there
could have been an erroneous understanding of causes of
previous flooding.   The figure of 5% is therefore slightly
higher than is probably the actual situation.  
      Past experience   of flooding of the
Waimakariri influenced   respondents'   perceptions of
both past and future risk (see Tables 2.11 and 2.12).
  Nearly 30% of those who had experienced flooding in the
past felt at risk or at extreme risk over the past five years
whereas only 6% of those with no past experience of flooding
of the Waimakariri felt at risk.  
    Twenty-four per cent of those with previous
Waimakariri experience believe they are at risk or at extreme
risk from flooding over the next 10 years while only 8% of
those with no past experience share the same fears.  
    Fifteen per cent have had experience of flooding
elsewhere in New Zealand.   No statistical relationship was
found between this past experience and their perceptions of
risk from the Waimakariri.   For most of those who had
experienced flooding elsewhere, approximately only
one-sixth indicated this had occurred within the past 10 years
(see Table 2.10).  
      2.5.3 Geographical situation (i.e. risk class)
on floodplain - findings    
  table 2.13 Perceived risk in past by risk class  
  table 2.14 Perceived risk in future by risk class  
  Question D.1.       "Did you realise that your
property is situated on a floodplain?"    
  table 2.15 Realisation that property on floodplain  
  table 2.16 Risk class by realisation on floodplain  
  table 2.17 Realise on floodplain by safe in past  
  table 2.18 Realise on floodplain by safe in future    
      2.5.4 Geographical situation on the floodplain
- discussion    
      Geographical situation (rural/urban)   on
the floodplain did influence perception to a limited extent&semi; a
weak relationship was found between risk class and feelings of
safety both in the past and in the future.   A greater
number of those who live closest to the river perceived a past
risk (12%) than those who face a lesser degree or risk (3% and
4% respectively) (see Table 2.13).   Conversely, greater
numbers in risk classes 2 and 3 felt safe or completely safe
than did those in class 1.   A similar picture emerged with
regard to future risk (see Table 2.14).  
    One interesting observation arose when questionnaire
returns were compared between risk classes.   Sixty-one per
cent of Classes A and B participated in the survey, as did 55%
of Classes C and D, and 53% of Classes E and F and others (see
Table 1.1).   One of the reasons for a lower comparative
return from at risk Classes C to F could be attributed to an
absence of perceived risk.  
    Nearly one-third of respondents were unaware that
their property was situated on a floodplain (Table 2.13).
  These were not confined solely to any one risk class (see
Table 2.14).   A surprising revelation was that nearly 40%
of those in risk class 2 (which equates with Classes C and D
in Fig. 1.2) are not aware they own property on a floodplain
yet those who face a lower level of risk (risk class 3) have
an increased awareness.  
    A weak relationship was found to exist between an
awareness that the property one owns is located on the
floodplain and a feeling of safety both in the past and in the
future (Tables 2.17 and 2.18).   Fewer of those who realise
they live on a floodplain felt safe or completely safe in the
past than those who were not aware.   A difference in past
and future perceptions of risk was also manifest in this
sub-group.  
      2.5.5 Personality traits - findings    
    (Tables marked with an * indicate   respondents'  
first choice where they were asked to rank options.)  
    A.1     "Some people believe floods are caused
by the way we use our land close to rivers, some believe that
floods are 'an act of God' or a natural event.   Others
believe that floods are caused by a combination of these
things."       Respondents were asked to rank a
number of options to indicate what they felt were the main
causes of floods.  
  *table 2.19 Attribution of flood causation  
    A.2     "Who do you think is most responsible
for making preparations so that a major flood does as little
damage as possible to your home and family?"      
  *table 2.20 Responsibility for mitigating flood damage  
      2.5.6 Personality traits -
discussion    
    Fifty-four per cent attributed causation of flooding
to nature.   Twenty-six per cent blamed upper catchment land
use while 11% saw floodplain land use as a major factor
although the word   "exacerbate"   in the question
rather than   "cause"   might have produced a
different response.   Nonetheless 37% are aware of the role
of human activities and land use in hazard situations.  
    Although 54% of respondents indicated that Nature was
the major 'cause' of flooding, this could not be demonstrated
statistically to have influenced their perception of past and
future risk.   Nor did their views on the culpability of
upper catchment and floodplain land use.
    Personality traits   did not appear to
influence flood perception.  
    Only 4% saw a role for the individual in the
prevention of flood damage.   Responsibility was seen to lie
with the Catchment Board by almost two-thirds of respondents.
  This could indicate a belief that structural controls are
the only way flood damage can be mitigated.   Only
approximately one-fifth of respondents were amenable to
the concept underlying the 'Urban Flood Loss Reduction
Policy', namely that a combination of structural and
non-structural measures can reduce flood damage.  
      2.5.7 Knowledge of event - findings    
    B.1.       "What do you think the term
'100-year flood' means?
    a. A flood of a certain size that occurs once
every one hundred years.
  b. A flood of a certain size that has a 1% chance of
occurring in any one year."        
  table 2.21 Understanding of flood return periods  
      2.5.8 Knowledge of event -
discussion    
    There was an almost even split between those who
appeared to understand the technical term '100-year flood' and
those who did not.   However, it is not possible to
determine whether those who answered correctly actually do
understand or whether a guess was attempted.  
    When the survey was designed it was intended to test
whether floodplain occupants understand probabilities of
risk expressed as a percentage over a period of time better
than they understand statistical notions of risk that refer to
return periods.   Catchment Board staff believed the
questions posed were too difficult for most people to answer
so the author chose a simpler 'either/or' option.  
    Other studies suggest that the term '100-year flood'
is not well understood by the general public.   The
implications of this finding are that specific
probabilities of risk around which flood management
options are designed should be described in terms that the
public are able to understand.  
    Statistical analysis did not reveal any relationship
between   respondents'   flood   knowledge   and
their perceptions of risk, both past and future.  
        2.6 Summary    
    Occupants of the Waimakariri River floodplain have
felt safe from flooding over the past five years.   Their
own reasons indicated that they had faith in structural
controls, a lack of awareness of risk and a belief that the
characteristics of the river such as large upper basins
and the capacity of the river bed to cope with large
quantities of water could reduce the likelihood of
flooding.  
    Of the factors suggested by the literature as
influencing risk perception, a weak relationship was found
between perception and past flooding experience of the
Waimakariri.   However, as only a very few people had had
this experience this finding should be viewed with caution.
  A weak relationship appeared between perception and
geographical situation on the floodplain (risk class).   No
relationship was found between perception and flood knowledge,
and perception and personality traits.  
    People thought that they were moderately safe against
future risk over the next 10 years&semi; a change in perception
appeared from that towards risk in the past.   A higher
proportion believed they were facing a degree of risk in the
future (10% v. 7%) and a lower proportion indicated feelings
of safety (58% v. 72%).   Faith in structural controls, the
fact that there were perceived to be no previous problems,
positive river capacity, plus distance from the river were
cited as reasons for feeling safe.   Reasons for feeling
unsafe in the future included the effects of climatic changes
attributable to the 'greenhouse effect' and depletion of the
ozone layer, the unpredictability of nature, and a belief in
being unable to predict future events.  
    Factors predicted in the literature to influence
perception of past risk also influenced perception of future
risk.  
    The above outcomes could be attributed to the fact
that flooding of the Waimakariri River is an infrequent
occurrence.   Few of those who live on the floodplain at
present were there at the time of the last major flood in
1957.   The fact that weak or very weak relationships were
found between risk perception and past flood experience
could be attributable to the fading of long-term memory.
  However, even if the Waimakariri had flooded, say, within
the past five years, it is difficult to know whether these
outcomes might have been considerably different.  
    It is also not possible to say what effect this survey
may have had in alerting people to potential future
risk.      

  

      National population dynamics: the reproductive
revolution  
    Maori population dynamics in this period were
dominated by a decline in fertility.   This trend reached
its most accelerated pitch in the mid 1970s.   The key
changes are shown in Table 8.2 and Figure 8.1.  
    Fertility declines were most rapid in the 1970s,
dropping from 5.0 live births per woman in 1971 to 3.0 in
1976.   The most accelerated changes came at older ages.
  By 1983, Maori fertility was close to the 
  Figure 8.1: Family Formation Patterns, Maori and Total
Populations, 1962, 1971, 1982  
  Table 8.2: Crude Birth Rates, Age-specific Fertility
Rates, Total Fertility Rates, and Gross Reproduction Rates,
1966-86  
Pakeha level (Maori TFR = 2.2, as against 1.9   TFR=Total
Fertility Rate  ), and in fact Maori age-specific rates were
lower at older ages.   The Maori synthetic early
childbearing rate (similar to TFR but more 'localised') was
1.2 births per woman, but only 0.6 for Pakeha, whereas from 25
to 39 years it was 1.0 for Maori as against 1.5 for
non-Maori.  
    Family-formation patterns were thus still rather
different from Pakeha even though the TFRs were very close.
  These patterns are clearly affected by a cultural
difference in approaches to creating families, not in the
overall dimensions of a family.   Among Maori   'The
debate today appears to centre around the timing of the
commencement and the limitation of childbearing, but not
whether or not to have children'   (Douglas   et
al  . 1981 pp.43-48, summarised in Sceats 1988b, p.389).
  High levels of early childbearing by Maori may be followed
by close birth-spacing, which would abrogate traditional Maori
norms, for   'the desire to "get it over and done with
as quickly as possible" appears to occur across all ethnic
groups... and its negative connotation is somewhat at odds
with the other generally favourable attitudes towards
childbearing and rearing'   (Sceats 1988b, p.390).
  Unfortunately, parity data from vital statistics are
severely flawed (Pool &amp; Sceats 1981, pp.86-89), so that it is
difficult to examine this issue in detail.  
    What is clear, however, is that Maori reproduction was
(and still is) concentrated at younger ages.   Their levels
of teenage fertility were exceptionally high, although also
declining (Table 8.2).   In the developed countries in
the early 1980s Maori levels were surpassed - not just for
teenage fertility rates, but also for the degree of
concentration at the youngest teen ages - only by the Black
American population (Table 8.3).   In 1971 Maori rates
resembled those of the least developed countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America.   The 1983 rate was still close to
those poorer Latin American nations, such as Ecuador, Paraguay
and Peru (United Nations 1988a, Table 117).   It must be
stressed that teenage fertility puts both the mother and baby
at risk, not only in health terms, but also for schooling and
employment, and that this may set in train multi-generational
patterns of disadvantage.  
    The mechanism for achieving low fertility,
particularly from age 25 years on, was the resort to very
efficient contraception and sterilisation.   Pill use is
slightly higher among non-Maori than Maori but sterilisation
  Table 8.3: Teenage Fertility, Selected Populations  
and contraceptive injection are more prevalent among Maori
than Pakeha.   For both of these methods New Zealand levels
appear to be among the highest in the developed countries and
for sterilisation may be among the highest anywhere (Sceats &amp;
Pool 1985b, pp.190-1).   The percentage of New Zealand women
currently using a method of contraception is very high, so
that the similarity of Maori and non-Maori rates indicates
that both Maori and Pakeha are nearing the end of their
fertility transition.  
    It must be stressed that abortion, data for which are
given in Table 8.4, was not an important mechanism in the
fertility decline.   Both Maori and non-Maori levels of
induced fetal loss in 1983 were lower than for all other
comparable populations with good data except the Netherlands.
  Moreover, for Maori and Pakeha, unlike Pacific
Islanders, abortion was at younger ages, so that it was
being used for the timing of the first birth, rather than for
birth limitation.   This is yet 
  Table 8.4: Maori and Other Ethnic Groups: Total Abortion
Rates (per Woman), 1983-86 and Age-Specific Abortion Rates
(per 1000), 1986  
another piece of evidence of the passage of Maori through the
fertility transition (Sceats 1988b &amp; c).  
    The last few paragraphs have described one of the
world 's most rapid reproductive revolutions, equalling or even
exceeding other fast transitions, such as the Thai or Chinese.
  Declines came at all ages, but were more radical at 25
years and over.   The decrease in fertility described here
resulted from the adoption of modern contraception and
sterilisation, primarily for family limitation, rather than
for the timing and spacing of pregnancies.   Induced
abortion played a very minor role.    
    Explaining the Maori fertility decline  
    So far only the mechanisms of the transition have been
discussed&semi; now it is necessary to analyse its determinants.
  These can be summarised by arguing that this
remarkable fertility decline occurred generally for
reasons that closely fit demographic transition theory,
reviewed in chapter 1.   It outlines and attempts to
explain the shift from high mortality and high fertility,
producing low rates of natural increase&semi; through
decreasing death rates, and thus accelerating rates of natural
increase&semi; followed by declines in levels of reproduction,
resulting in a deceleration of the rates of natural
increase&semi; to a final stage when mortality and fertility rates
are both low, and rates of natural increase are once again
very low, but for different reasons from those at the outset
of the transition.  
    By 1966, Maori had reached the takeoff point for the
third of these stages, a rapid decline in fertility.   The
pre-conditions were all in place.   Mortality had already
declined significantly, survivorship of infants and children
was high by any standards, and rates of natural increase were
approaching biological maxima.   Moreover, other
socio-economic determinants were present: the population was
now highly urbanised, while education had been universal for
about a century.   There was also close contact and often
intermarriage with a population with low fertility values.
  Finally, effective means of contraception were available
and information on them was being diffused through regional
leadership conferences already by the early 1960s (Pool 1964,
pp.404-5).  
    It would therefore have been surprising if Maori
fertility had not declined.   If their levels of natality
had remained high, they would have been unique among
populations, including indigenous minorities, having the
attributes just listed.   These will now be examined in
further detail.  
    Universal education is often cited as an important
determinant of fertility declines, because of the twin effects
of attitude and value formation in younger generations and a
shift in patterns of economic support between generations
(inter-generational transfers).   Cleland and Wilson, in a
very wide-ranging review, conclude that   'the timing of
transition is strongly influenced by cultural boundaries and
is associated with indicators of social development, such as
literacy, rather than economic indicators'   (1987,
p.27).   The case relating to inter-generational transfers,
an economic argument here crudely summarised, would be that
schoolchildren can no longer contribute to household economic
activities, while even a free school system involves some
costs (see Caldwell 1980&semi; a general review of decline theories
is in Freedman 1982).  
    Thus a rather pertinent question, given a century of
universal literacy attained through a school system which is
culturally Pakeha, is why Maori fertility did not decline
earlier.   Here the argument must be switched to acknowledge
the role of other variables within the broader complex area of
culture.   Culture has been seen as   'a mediating
factor'  , which, for example, explains the slower
declines of fertility among Muslims in southern Thailand than
among Buddhist Thais (Knodel, Apichat &amp; Nibhon 1987, p.202).
  For Maori, it could be postulated that Maoritanga (value
system), focused on a complex form of social organisation
emphasising the lineage, has remained resilient even among
those urban Maori who share in common with Pakeha neighbours,
and even spouses, many features of day-to-day lifestyles (cf.
the force of social organisations in Africa, Cleland &amp; Wilson
1987, p.27).   For example, Douglas has demonstrated the
persistence of strongly pro-natalist norms and cultural props
(1977).   In a sample covering both urban and rural Maori he
and his colleagues showed that these norms were focused more
narrowly on the maintenance of family structures and on
familialistic norms (whanautanga) and more widely on kinship
values (whanaungatanga).   In the 1980s, after more than 150
years of co-residence with Pakeha, these norms still far more
closely resembled those of Asia than of Pakeha New Zealand
(Population Div. ESCAP 1986, drawing on Douglas 1981 and other
New Zealand and Asian studies).  
    Maori norms were sufficiently powerful to
counter-balance the impact of minority status and close
interaction with the relatively low-fertility Pakeha society.
  For some Maori, fertility and rapid growth were still seen
to be mechanisms for cultural maintenance, somewhat akin to
the    'revenge of the cradles'   catch-cry of
francophone Quebecois politicians in the 1960s.   Thus even
before the transition got under way, there was concern that
the adoption of contraception might not be of benefit to the
Maori (Pool 1964, p.404, quoting Tairawhiti Regional
Leadership Conference, 1962).   At the end of the transition
there was still debate on this issue.   In a Waikato-based
study,   'A significant number of respondents reported
that their male relations encourage and their female relatives
discourage childbearing...   Many respondents felt that to
be Maori required them to have large families because the two
were identified as being compatible and until recently
occurring together'   (Douglas 1981, pp.43-48).  
    Early marriage and family formation were the essential
mechanisms by which this could be achieved, so that as
recently as 1971, two-thirds of Maori women in their early
twenties had already been married, according to census data.
  This percentage declined in the 1970s, dropping to 55 per
cent (Pool 1986b).   This shift was, however, associated
with other changes in Maori nuclear-family structures beyond
the scope of the present analysis.   Nevertheless, it is
important to note in passing that when a transition in family
formation occurred, it took a somewhat different form from
that followed by Pakeha.   For example, in 1981 25 per cent
of Maori solo parents had never married, as against 14 per
cent of Pakeha.   Twenty per cent of one-parent Maori
households has a mother (usually) or father aged less than 20
years.   As Maori families were larger than Pakeha, there
were also differences at the other end of the reproductive
span: there were more Maori than non-Maori solo parents who
were widow(er)s still with dependent children born relatively
late in their   parents'   reproductive span.
  Against this only 48 per cent of Maori one-parent families
were headed by a divorced or separated person, as against 72
per cent of Pakeha (Butterworth &amp; Mako 1989, Table 2.7).
  By 1981, only 56 per cent of Maori infants (aged less than
1 year) were in two-parent households, while a further 29 per
cent were in extended families&semi; but 15 per cent were in
one-parent households, double the level for Pacific Islanders
and five times that for Pakeha (SMG 1989, Appendix 1c).  
    Eventually, however, Maori fertility did decline,
following a very sharp trajectory.   The question then
arises why this should finally have occurred, given the
apparent strength of cultural props.   Demographic
transition theory provides some leads from analyses across an
enormous range of societies, cultures and populations -
Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, Animist or Buddhist&semi;
minority or majority&semi; capitalist or marxist-leninist&semi; tribal
or nation-state&semi; colonial, post-colonial or never colonised.
  The conclusions are remarkably consistent and
deterministic: a decrease in fertility seems inevitable
once a certain threshold - usually a complex of factors:
increased survivorship, urbanisation, education, availability
of efficient means of fertility regulation - has been
passed.  
    For Maori this threshold was determined by improved
survivorship and high levels of urbanisation, achieved prior
to the period covered in this chapter but at a time in which
efficient means of fertility regulation were available.
  This reinforced the long period of exposure of Maori to an
education system which is Pakeha, or more correctly 'Western'
in orientation, something which holds true for the majority of
the world 's schoolchildren and tertiary students.
  Nevertheless, this system does draw its rationale and many
underlying cultural values from outside Maori society.
  Thus it can be argued that long-term exposure of Maori to
formal, and informal, education and communications should
have played some role.   But it seems that the impact of the
education system was more as a reinforcement of attitudinal
changes within Maori society leading to the onset of the
transition, than a necessary or significant pre-condition of
it.  
    Support for this case can be provided by
cross-reference to Thailand, which makes a useful
comparison both in terms of timing and the scale of their
fertility decline.   There, TFRs dropped from around six
births per woman in 1970 to just above replacement (2.2-2.3)
by 1987, even reaching as low as 3.1-3.2 in the strongly
pro-natalist Muslim southern region (Chayovan, Knodel &amp;
Kamnuasilpa 1988, Table 1).   Moreover, a cross-national
study on family size and structure in relation to fertility
regulation, in which New Zealand participated (noted above),
also included Thailand.   In Thailand, the results of that
study showed some of the same contradictions found among Maori
but not Pakeha, between the large families of older
generations, and the small family normative structures of
younger couples (Population Division, ESCAP 1986&semi; Knodel
  et al  . 1987, p.197).  
    Reference to Thailand has yet another value.   It
permits a 'case-control' study of fertility, as it were, for
Thais, in contrast to Maori,   'had never been subjected
to colonial rule...'   (C.Orange quoted in Legat 1990,
p.94).   Thus, by comparing the Maori and Thai fertility
decline one can 'control' for the effects of the colonial
implantation of alien values.   This indicates that a rapid
fertility decline can occur in the absence of interaction
and/or domination by a European colonial or majority
population.  
    In Thailand, a range of radical societal changes
affected demand for children: reduced child mortality&semi;
perceived rises in the cost of living and child-rearing&semi;
market penetration, monetisation and consumer aspirations&semi;
increased educational aspirations&semi; and a decline in the
contribution by children to household economic activities.
  These mainly socio-economic changes countered a cultural
value,   'a deeply entrenched sense and practice of
parent repayment...'  .   Like many cultural norms
this had both quantitative and qualitative dimensions (Knodel
  et al  . 1987, p.171).  
    While these points throw some light on the Maori
fertility decline, the comparison with Thailand is perhaps
most pertinent at the macro  -  societal level.
  Firstly, Thailand had a vigorous family-planning
programme (Knodel   et al.   1987, chapt.9), yet no
such mechanism was present in New Zealand.   Here, family
planning depends entirely on individual motivation and
follow-up, usually by couples deciding to employ
contraception/ sterilisation and then obtaining prescriptions
or services from a private fee-charging practitioner.   The
closest the government comes to encouraging family planning,
for either Maori or Pakeha, is through reduced prescription
charges.   Moreover, sterilisation is usually carried
out for a fee in a private hospital/ clinic because of long
public-institution waiting lists for surgery.   Beyond this,
  'Policy relating to the provision of contraception to
the young remains an area where conservative social attitudes
appear to exert a control'   (Sceats 1988b, p.384).
  Thus government can hardly be seen as mounting a concerted
programme of fertility control.  
    Indeed, the situation is even more paradoxical.
  While practising low fertility, both Maori and Pakeha
societies are pro-natalist, and most social policy instruments
directed equally at Maori and Pakeha support reproduction:
family benefits, housing assistance, Domestic Purposes
Benefits (for solo parents), negative tax termed 'Family
Support', and more generally the status accorded parenthood.
      'Thus there exist in New Zealand both a social
climate and a social welfare system which are supportive and
encouraging of childbearing'   (Sceats 1988b, p.405&semi;
detailed chapts. 11 &amp; 12).     The major socio-cultural
difference between Maori and Pakeha is the degree of emphasis
on family structure lineage and kinship as a central cultural
trait, as against the simple desire for children
(pro-natalism).   For Pakeha pro-natalist values are often
reinforced by a stated need for family continuity.
  This seems to be a different cultural norm from
whanautanga, but it could   'owe much to the increasing
interweaving of Polynesian values into the broader social
fabric of New Zealand'   (Sceats 1988b, p.389).  
    A third aspect of the Thai  'reproductive revolution'
is that   'The substantial reduction that has already
taken place has occurred in the absence of coercive measures
and without the need for introducing incentives or
disincentives into the family planning programme'  .
  As noted above, there is no record of incentives,
disincentives or coercion in New
Zealand    ,    .       If anything, the
incentives are in the opposite direction.   But as the case
of Thailand so clearly shows, such measures are unnecessary
where    'socio-economic change [has] helped
predispose the population toward fertility reduction and
continued to reinforce and strengthen the demand for
smaller families after the process got underway'  
(Knodel   et al.   1987, pp. 205 &amp; 204).  
    In sum, any fertility decline in New Zealand, Maori or
Pakeha, rather than being promoted by government, must be
achieved through the motivation and action of couples in the
face of some not inconsiderable obstacles.   Yet despite
all these constraints, the Maori 'fertility revolution' has
been among the most rapid anywhere, rivalling China 's.    
  

        7
  Old Ideas:
  The Ageing Society      
    But you 're not   really   old, we say to those
we know and love.   We mean, there is more to you than
wrinkles&semi; you 're far from tottering, mindless or dependent.
  Old is a label pinned more easily on strangers.
  Suggesting something more than mere chronological age,
phrases like 'over the hill' or 'past it' speak of loss of
youth and usefulness.   We see old people on the street -
but hardly see them at all.   For us, they have withdrawn to
the margins of life.   They are merely waiting to die.  
      Living longer    
    If they were it would, for most, be a long wait.
  The average 60-year-old Pakeha woman still has a quarter
of her life - or 21 years - ahead of her.   A Pakeha man has
another 17 years to look forward to.   The Maori figures are
lower - 16 years life expectancy for 60-year-old women, 13 for
men.   But Maori are catching up fast to Pakeha, and both
groups are living longer than they were several years ago.  
      Working less    
    One reason older people in this society tend to become
invisible is that, although they are living longer, they are
retiring from paid work earlier.   Retirement itself is a
recent invention - people used
  graph: Average Life Expectancy At 60 Years  
to work until they dropped.   The average age of retirement
has come down from the beginning of the century.   Then, 80
percent of men 65 and older were in paid work.   By 1986
almost 90 percent of men and nearly all women over 65 were out
of the paid workforce.   The number of 60-pluses with paid
work fell by a fifth between 1976 and 1986, even though there
were more people in that age group than ever before.  
    Now, even if they want to go on working, older people
are often made to feel they should move over for the young.
  We give them the message, implicitly if not explicitly,
that we do not want old men in swept-up offices, old women in
smart shops.   We are more comfortable when they go home
and do the gardening or take up bowls.  
    There is no fixed age at which people are expected to
leave paid work.   Retirement, voluntary or compulsory,
depends on how well people are, whether they want to keep on
working, and what interests they have to pursue at home.
  It depends, too, on what jobs are available, and whether
they can choose not to retire - in many organisations
retirement is compulsory.   Then there is the retiree 's
financial situation.   Many face the problem of what to live
on once they are no longer in paid employment.   Finally, as
we have seen, other people 's attitudes will have an impact
too.  
    Retirement does not mean the same for everyone.
  While women generally leave paid employment younger than
men, most women never retire at all because their major
responsibility for housework is never-ending.   Ironically,
this may be a good thing for women - it continues giving them
a sense of purpose while their male partners often face a life
made meaningless without paid work.  
    Maori and Pacific Islanders tend to retire earlier
than Pakeha, possibly because more of them are manual workers
and they do not enjoy such good health.  
    Self-employed people, such as farmers, professionals
and small business owners, were a quarter of the paid
workforce 60 or older in 1976, a third in 1986.   They tend
to go on working longer than wage and salary earners, probably
because their working conditions are more flexible.
  They can choose when to retire or cut down on their
working hours.  
    Retirement is a major event in anyone 's life, yet
surprisingly little is done to prepare people for the dramatic
change in lifestyle it heralds - in stark contrast to the way
we ready young people to go out to work.   Some financial
planning is probably all that many older people - those lucky
enough not to have to rely solely on a government benefit - do
in preparation for it.   Yet the new retiree must cope not
just with endless leisure and possibly a reduced income, but
also with all those community attitudes suggesting a person
who does not go out to work is on the scrapheap.  
      Older and fitter    
    Not only are people living longer and retiring
earlier, they are also fitter in their old age than ever
before.   About a third of 60 to 74-year-olds have some
impairment, but it is usually minor - the need for glasses or
a hearing aid - and it scarcely restricts their activities at
all.   Only four out of every 100 in this age group have a
severe handicap.   The incidence of this increases from 75
onwards but, even so, only 15 percent of very old people are
severely impaired.   What is even more surprising, given our
assumptions about old age, is that only six percent of those
over 65 live in institutions like hospitals or rest homes.
  Most are independent and stay that way until the end of
their lives.  
      Older and bolder    
    A good reason for amending our idea of old age is that
by early next century we will be living amongst more and more
of these fitter, independent, older people.   The numbers of
60-pluses increased by eight percent between 1981 and
1986, while the total population grew by only three percent.
  One in eight New Zealanders are now 60 or older.
  In 30   years'   time the baby boomers born in the
1950s and   '  60s will reach this age and, depending on
what happens to our birth rate, comprise about a quarter of
the population (see Chapter 8).  
  illustration    caption  
  illustration    caption  
    We could learn a lot from the status given to elderly
Maori - especially those who become kaumatua because of their
wisdom and mana.   We should be looking for ways to use
older people 's energy and experience, giving them access to
training and education, and making it easier for them to
contribute.   We cannot afford to push so many people with
so much to offer outside the mainstream of society.  
    The baby-boom elderly might change dramatically our
ideas of what it means to be old.   As generations age, they
carry with them values and preferences formed throughout their
lives by differing historical events and social eras.   In
the next few decades we will be seeing grannies who wore hippy
beads and flowers.   Behind them will come a wave of ageing
yuppies.   But even amongst their peers, no age group is
homogenous.   The elderly are as diverse in their needs,
lifestyles and personalities as any group of 30-year-olds.
  The age span from 60 to 90 covers more than one
generation, after all.  
    Not only is it in our own interests not to push older
people to the margins of life, we may find they will not let
us.   As a quarter of the population, the 60-pluses will be
in a strong position to dictate their own terms.   If we
refuse to change our attitudes, we may face a grey
revolution.  
  references  
        8
  The Bulge in the Boaconstrictor:
  Population Change      
    Thirty and 40 years ago the country was economically
and socially stable, and the population was growing faster
than it had since the 19th and early 20th centuries.  
    Many of our current decision-makers and power-brokers
grew up to take population growth for granted.   We made
sheepish jokes about the woolly population outnumbering the
human, but we were gaining more than 45,000 people a year.
  We talked of New Zealanders numbering five million by the
end of the century.  
    The fact is we are unlikely to reach even four million
by the year 2000, and we should no longer take population
growth for granted in our planning.   By the late 1970s, our
net gain had dropped to only 10,000 people a year.   Our
annual growth rate had gone from two percent to less than half
a percent.   Over the next 25 years, our population will
probably increase by less than one percent a year.  
    Between 1971 and 1986 New Zealand 's total population
increased by 16 percent, with Maori gaining a spectacular
40 percent.   Both figures are likely to drop.   The
overall rate of increase will be about 13 percent from 1986 up
to the year 2001, the Maori rate about 30 percent.   Maori,
who were 12 percent of the total population in 1986, will be
about 16 percent by then.  
    Two elements contribute to population growth (or
decline) - births and migration.   Birth rates have fallen
since the 1960s and are unlikely to climb again.   Migration
flows are rather less predictable.  
      Footloose New Zealanders    
    New Zealanders are becoming increasingly footloose.
  More and more fly in and out of New Zealand every year.
  Arrivals and departures trebled between 1970 and 1985.
  But it is a myth that New Zealand suffers a huge and
continuous outflow of migrants.   Year by year, the flow is
erratic.   Since 1980 it has changed direction several
times.   During 1983 we had a net gain of nearly 15,500
people.   In 1989 we lost nearly 19,000.   The most recent
figures show a balance in inflow and outflow.  
    Several factors lie behind these migrational swings.
  The baby boomers, born in large numbers in the 1950s and
1960s, are now of an age when people most want to experience
foreign life and travel.   Quite simply, New Zealand has
bred more potential travellers.   The economic situation
is also crucial.   New Zealanders leave home when the
economy slumps, and return in droves when it
  illustration    caption  
picks up.   About 200,000 Kiwis live in Australia alone and
they, unlike Pacific Islanders, Europeans and Asians, may
enter the country as of right whenever they wish.   The
number of New Zealanders who decide to come home cannot easily
be predicted.   So however finely tuned our immigration
policy, whether we fling open the door or only hold it ajar,
migration is likely to go on being something of an unknown
quantity in the population mix.  
      Smaller families, later motherhood    
    The intensely personal business of having a baby is
the population 's most crucial ingredient and, fortunately
for planners, also its most predictable.   Birth rates, or
fertility, have fallen since last century.   For many
reasons, women began to have fewer babies.   The
1930s  '   Depression low was an average 2.3 children per
woman.   The baby boom 25 or so years later temporarily
interrupted this trend towards smaller families - in 1961 the
average woman had 4.3 children.   But afterwards we
continued down the fertility slope into the 1970s and
1980s.  
    Since then our birth rate, like that of many developed
countries, has been below replacement level or just on it.
  Many couples are not producing enough children to replace
themselves.   To do so, women must have on average 2.1
children each.   In 1983 we were having only 1.9, and now
the average number of babies per woman is just over two.
  Pakeha women average 1.9 children, Maori women 2.2.
  But the fall in Maori fertility has been even more
dramatic - Maori women averaged more than six babies each in
1962.  
    This does not mean the population has stopped growing.
  Even without migrational gains, New Zealand 's population
will go on growing because births exceed deaths.
  Superficially, recent figures suggest a return to bigger
families - 50,000 births a year in the early 1980s, more than
55,000 in 1987, and 57,000 two years later.   But this is
another effect of the baby boom - the baby-boom echo.
  Those born in the peak birth-rate year 1961 are having
their 29th
  illustration    caption  
birthdays this year, and many are getting pregnant.   Even
if each individual woman has fewer children, there are enough
women having them to ensure a bumper crop of babies.  
    Another trend behind the recent upswing in the birth
rate is the decision many women, especially Pakeha, have made
to delay motherhood until their late 20s and 30s.   Maori
women are less likely to have children in their 30s, but fewer
teenagers, both Maori and Pakeha, are becoming mothers.
  Later motherhood, however, does not necessarily mean more
women will have more children&semi; on the contrary, it may mean
they have fewer because of leaving childbearing until later.
  The baby boomers will be followed into parenthood by a
much smaller group of people born in the 1970s, who will be
having babies 10 or 15 years from now.   So the recent
increase in the birth rate is unlikely to last beyond the
middle of this decade, and there is certainly no baby boom in
the 1950s sense.  
        The baby-boom bulge    
    The baby boomers have moved through New Zealand
society like the bulge in a boaconstrictor.   In the 1950s
and 1960s the bulge filled the maternity hospitals, then the
kindergartens and primary and secondary schools.   It
flooded onto the job market (just as unemployment struck),
perhaps travelled overseas, and is now settling down into
domesticity and childrearing.   Before it came a small
Depression-age generation, now in their 5Os, and after it will
come the   '  70s age group, the generation that was too
small to fill the primary schools opened for a swelling
population in the 1950s and 1960s.  
    It is another myth that our population is rapidly
ageing.   Our present median age is 30 - half of us are
older than that, the other half younger.   Between 1991 and
2001, only a small group of Depression-born babies will reach
retirement age.   Just over one in six of us is 60 or more.
  This age group grew by 20 percent between 1981 and 1991.
  It will grow only 14 percent in the following decade.  
  illustration    caption  
    A glance at the snake shows that the baby-boom
generation will not begin celebrating its 60th birthday until
about 2010 and later.   This is when the greying of New
Zealand will begin (see Chapter 7).   This is when the
pressure will come on to goods and services catering for older
people, and on to superannuation, or whatever type of income
support is then in place.  
    In the meantime, the small group of over 80s is
getting bigger.   They are living longer and requiring
medical and residential care, and services such as meals on
wheels.  
      Don't take growth for granted    
    Decision-makers should be concerned not so much with
how many people they must cater for, but who these people are,
and how the population is made up.   As the baby bulge, for
instance, has moved through its lifecycle, it has created
alternate expansions and contractions of demand for various
goods and services.   These can be anticipated and planned
for.   Primary school intakes can be predicted at least five
years ahead, with implications for the supply of teachers,
classrooms, crayons, readers and sticking plasters.   We can
also predict how many people will need jobs and training, how
many houses they will need, and how many elderly will need
looking after.  
    Population growth and contraction are not in the lap
of the gods.   While birth and migration are the result of
personal decisions made in private, the effect of these
decisions is public and well known.   We know more about
likely population trends than many other aspects of the
future.   They are there for decision-makers to use.  
  references      
  

        MATATA RAILWAY, ROADS AND BRIDGES
LEAGUE    
  by Walter Gibbons
    From the 1870s, when Vogel began his Public Works
Scheme, settler communities looked forward anxiously to the
time when roads, and more particularly railways, would provide
the promised internal communications.   Some had long to
wait, for New Zealand was not an easy land for engineers.
  Political pressures dictated the routes of many railways,
and also determined where branch lines, some of questionable
worth, were constructed.   The North Island Main Trunk line
had been completed in 1908.   That line passed through the
central part of the island generally along the line of the
Rangitikei and Waipa Rivers.   A branch line from Hamilton
to Rotorua had been completed and operating from 1894.   The
East Coast looked forward to a completed system which would
follow the route from Hamilton through Gisborne, Wairoa and
Napier to Woodville and thence to join the Main Trunk at
Palmerston North.   Other than the line to Rotorua the main
axis of the North Island system had by-passed the coast.  
    Such apparent neglect impelled small communities to
exert their own political pressure on Members of Parliament to
have the eastern route planned and constructed over its whole
distance without further delays.   These small communities
acted in conjunction with each other soliciting support from
near and far when it suited their purpose, but acting
independently when their own interests were threatened.
  Few groups even thought about the financial viability of
the railway they were asking for&semi; for them a rail connection
was a status symbol, and also a connection with an exotic
world which many had not even visited.  
    Engineers drew plans and governments gave effect to
them.   Often works were commenced to placate local
insistence.   So it was with the East Coast Railway.   To
provide a rail link from Hamilton to Gisborne was a task of
some magnitude and such was the distance that small sections
could be constructed long before the final route had been
determined.   It was a long haul from Morrinsville to
Paeroa, and the Karangahake Tunnel had to be driven to provide
access to the Bay of Plenty.   Because of insistence from
the goldfields this work was carried out by 1905.   Within
the Bay itself works were commenced at Waihi, and a further
section begun at Mt. Maunganui.   This latter section
reached towards Te Puke by 1913.   (1)  
  Construction was then pushed on towards Paengaroa.  
    Within the Eastern Bay of Plenty there was room for
apprehension.   After 1894 there was local talk of a railway
from Rotorua to Te Teko, the historic railway it was called by
1910, thence via the Waioho and Waimana to Opotiki.   Such a
line envisaged a branch line from Koroinui to Whakatane.  
    In June 1897 the Whakatane County  Council chairman
had tabled a letter of 26/5/1897 received by him from the
president of the East Coast Railway League in Gisborne
covering a report of that League.   The Council, after
discussion, resolved that it communicate with the Chambers of
Commerce at Auckland and Napier, and with Kelly MLC, and with
Davies and Carroll MHRs advocating the construction of a light
railway from Gisborne to Opotiki via Motu, and from Opotiki to
Rotorua via Te Teko, as against any other route.   It was
also decided that any information available be requested from
railway leagues at Gisborne and Wairoa.   (2)  
  Three years later the County Council resolved to write to
the Government asking that the Opotiki-Whakatane-Rotorua
railway be commenced at an early date.   (3)  
  People along the coast envisaged a railway from Paengaroa
back to the coast at Otamarakau, thence along the sea front to
Matata and along the sandhills to Whakatane thence by tunnel
to Ohope and across the Ohiwa harbour to Opotiki.   It would
then follow the Waioeka River to Matawai to meet the projected
construction from Gisborne northward.   Other variations
were proposed from time to time by planners and politicians.
  In the event the line of the railway from Matata to
Taneatua was not determined and surveyed until 1917, and
construction was halted at Taneatua in 1926.   The line from
Gisborne eventually reached Motuhora and did not proceed
beyond that point.  
    Matata and Opotiki had been the main ports in the
Eastern Bay for many years.   Whakatane was slow to emerge
as a viable centre for it suffered from the wars, the attitude
of the local Maoris, the swamps which surrounded it, and a
fickle harbour bar.   But when the Opouriao Estate was
subdivided in 1896, and the Orini closed off from the
Rangitaiki in 1901, a considerable area of fertile land gave
Whakatane the impetus it needed.   In addition the Whakatane
and Opotiki Counties were divided in 1899 and local body
politics were centred in Whakatane.  
    Efforts to drain the swamp by private means were
unsuccessful so in 1910 the government was persuaded to take
on the drainage work, the major initial task being the
diversion of the Rangitaiki River from Okorero direct to
  map: The proposed route of the East Coast Railway  
the sea.   Any interference with the flow of water at Matata
would seriously affect the use of harbour facilities at
Matata.   Matata was therefore facing a number of problems.
  It was by 1912 no means certain that they would have a
railway.   They wanted a hinterland for farming but to drain
the swamp would mean losing the water which brought shipping
to the harbour.   The Manawahe area had been recently opened
up for settlement but the road was merely a rough track, and
it would be some years before the bushfelling and timber
milling would give way to farming.   Access to Whakatane was
by ferry across the Rangitaiki and then by the sandhills track
to Whakatane.   Burt Bros. had established a dairy factory
in Matata itself but there was difficulty in getting the cream
supply to the factory, and in any case from 1912 their factory
had to compete with the new Tarawera Co-operative Dairy
Company 's factory at Otakiri.   Matata township had been
surveyed and laid out as the township of Richmond in 1868, but
since then the Maoris had cultivated the whole area except the
sea front road each year, and streets and sections were no
longer
  photo    caption  
locatable.   It was not easy to invite a population
there.  
    No doubt there was discussion from time to time
regarding the problems of the settlement.   If no other body
was going to help them then they would do so themselves.   A
meeting of settlers was called for 5 October 1912 at the
Matata Hotel.   It was a Saturday afternoon.   Mr W.B.
Ingram was appointed to chair the meeting, which decided to
form itself into a Railway, Roads and Bridges League.   The
subscription was fixed at 2s. 6d per annum per member.   The
stated purpose was to bring forward any matter pertaining to
the benefit, needs, and progress of the district and to
co-operate with other leagues.   (4)     Meeting
times were fixed for 1.30 p.m. on the fourth Saturday in each
month.   Since some of the members had to ride down from
Manawahe this was no doubt a wise decision.   The time also
coincided with the regular rugby matches.   Attending the
inaugural meeting were W.B. Ingram, W.E.L. Laugeson, T.
Parkinson, F. Burt Sen., Jackson, McLachlan, J. Fenton,
McQuarrie, Hannon and W. Lees.   Soon after his appointment
as Chairman W.B. Ingram found that the League conflicted with
his rugby interests.   W. McLachlan was then elected to the
chair in an acting capacity and in his absence T. Parkinson
chaired the meetings.   W.E.L Laugeson was elected Honorary
Secretary.   (5)      
    The first meeting decided that an application be made
to the Native Minister, through W.D.S. MacDonald, M.P., for
the section opposite the tennis court, containing about five
acres, as a recreation ground for Matata&semi; that area to be
invested in trustees.   The Minister of Railways and Public
Works was advised that the League resented the expending of so
much capital on the Tauranga and Gisborne ends of the East
Coast Railway while nothing had been done to create a junction
from Matata both north and south.   (6)     This
surely suggests that the League saw a branch line to Te Teko
from Matata, and not from Rotorua to Te Teko.   The League
went on to a decision to write to the Minister of Public Works
pointing out the delay in prosecuting work on the Rangitaiki
outlet.   The initial meeting concluded with the sending of
a petition to the Whakatane County Council asking for the
opening of the streets in Matata.   (7)    
    The second meeting was held on 26 October 1912.
  Ingram, who was not present wrote suggesting surveyors
should be sent to Pikowai.   The League, considering the
dilapidated state of the bridges on the Manawahe road, and the
road itself, wrote to the Roads Department to have the bridges
attended to and the bad bends on the road removed and
straightened as when opened to the Lakes the new road would
become a thoroughfare.   The Manawahe Settlers Association
was asked for its support.   An unnamed section (probably
Sections 103 and 104) was to be cut up and sold as smaller
sections if a petition was successful.   The Minister of
Public Works was to be advised that the League regretted that
nothing had been placed on the estimates for the
Matata-Taramurui, Matata-Otamarakau, Matata inland road to
Whakatane, and only &pound;50 for the Herepuru
North Road.   The Whakatane County Council was to be asked
to have the ferry charges revised and reduced in the County.
  The Council was to be asked to pay the Matata District a
visit&semi; for both these matters the support of the Manawahe
Settlers Association was solicited.   And lastly the
attention of the Noxious Weeds Inspector was to be drawn to
the sweet briar on the Matata roads.  
    It is not clear how closely the League 's activities
were conducted in association with the rugby season but the
next meeting was not held until 19 April 1913.   Immediately
the League asked the Minister of Public Works, through W.D.S.
MacDonald, to have the railway authorised from Paengaroa to
Matata during the session of Parliament then current.   Such
was the urgency that the League sought the co-operation of the
Whakatane Chamber of Commerce, the Manawahe Settlers
Association, the Tauranga Railway League, the Paengaroa
Progressive Association and the Waimana and Opotiki Leagues.
  The meeting went on to consider further issues.
  Members thought to ask the Minister for Native Affairs to
have Sections 103 and 104, containing 200 acres, taken by the
Government and put on the market in suitable areas.   This
land, they said, had been given to the Ngatirangitihi and
Tarawera tribes 20 years previously to work on and during that
time they had done practically nothing with the land, with the
result that by 1913 the only occupiers were two Europeans.
  W. D. S. MacDonald was complimented on putting his efforts
into pushing on with the Rangitaiki Outlet and the League
trusted in his "continuous" assistance until its completion.
  The Lands Department was asked to carry out and complete
the main drain on the west side of the Tarawera River,
starting at Matata.   R.H. Abbott had offered to carry out
this work with his dredge if a satisfactory price could be
arranged.   The League urged that remaining work be carried
out as soon as possible on the Manawahe-Rotorua road as it
would make a difference of 15 miles to Matata people in case
of accidents.   The Postmaster-General was urged to
establish telephone communication between Whakatane and Matata
and the surrounding district as Matata was at a great
disadvantage without such a service.   The Secretary was
directed to ascertain from W.D.S. MacDonald, M.P., when the
Prime Minister W.F. Massey would be paying a visit to the
district, as the settlers wished to take him through the
Manawahe road, either coming or going.   (8)    
    The meeting of May 1913 was almost entirely devoted to
hearing the replies to letters, which no doubt members would
have to consider.   The only new business was to advise the
Telegraph Department or Postmaster General that seven
subscribers were available towards the establishment of an
exchange at Matata, and to ask if the department would make a
connection for that number.   Following on from that
discussion it was decided to ask the Government to appoint the
postmistress as Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths for
Matata district, as there was an up-to-date Post Office in
Matata, and anyone at the time having to register had to
travel a return distance of thirty-six miles to do so.
  (9)    
    At the June meeting the Minister of Lands was written
to urging haste with the inland road from the Outlet to Matata
as the greatest portion of traffic came that way.   The same
Minister was asked to have two shifts put on at the Rangitaiki
Outlet to expedite the work.   And strangely, the Minister
was asked to have a special carriage placed on the railways
throughout the Dominion for the use and convenience of women
travelling with young children.   As yet the train was
distant from Matata&semi; one can only conjecture who thought that
one up, and who had had unfortunate experiences.
  (10)    
    A combined meeting, but of which organisations the
detail was not recorded, was held at Matata in July.   Some
events of import were no doubt discussed, but most likely it
was a final decision to take the railway along the coast, for
the resolution from the meeting to be wired to the Minister of
Public Works read   "that in view of the early opening
of the Railway to Te Puke and its extention to Paengaroa and
Matata eastwards it is essential that the government be urged
to place a sufficient sum on the estimates for the immediate
erection of a permanent wharf at the Mount"  .
  (11)    
    At the ordinary League meeting in July Mr Hallett was
appointed to act as delegate to the meetings to be held at
Whakatane and Opotiki&semi; the purpose of the meetings, and the
Associations represented were not specified.   The League
proceeded to write to the Manager of the Northern Steamship
Company asking that cargo for Matata be not allowed to
accumulate at Tauranga and that more regular and frequent
trips should be made to Matata.   The Chief Postmaster at
Thames was written to asking that papers be sent by the early
mail to Matata from Whakatane.   The Whakatane County
Council was asked to supply poison grain for the destruction
of small birds and to set aside a day for distribution of the
grain.   The offending little birds were not cited, but a
further resolution called for the Minister of Lands to have
quail declared a nuisance.   (12)    
    By August there was some elation at the turn of events
in the railway construction.   The League sent a letter to
the Hon. W. Fraser expressing its appreciation of the remarks
made by him re the East Coast Railway construction from the
Mount to Matata and onwards, and the League hoped that the
Minister would see his way to having a substantial vote placed
on the estimates for pushing on with the line.   A Crown
Lands Ranger had recently been to Matata to inspect Sections
103 and 104 so that League wrote to the Commissioner of Crown
Lands, as, they said, there were many waiting with expectation
to take up pieces of these sections.   The League 's request
was to know if the allotments were shortly to be advertised.
  (13)    
    Confirmation that the railway would indeed pass
through Matata no doubt relieved the League of considerable
worry and they were free to contemplate other issues,
including, it may be noted, the lukewarm responses to some of
their requests.   At the September meeting Cuff, Laugeson
and Parkinson were instructed to interview the manager of Loan
and Mercantile to see if the saleyards might be used as a
pound.   In anticipating a positive response, the League
proposed A. Parkinson as a suitable poundkeeper.   The
Herepuru Road was still not completed so the Minister of
Public Works was asked for a sufficient sum to be placed on
the estimates to have the work done.   A further application
was made to the Native Minister regarding Sections 103 and
104.   A sub-committee of Lees, Parkinson, Greig and Savage
was set up to investigate shipping matters and report at the
next meeting.   There must have been a few Matata residents
with a soft spot for the birds, for at the end of the meeting
the resolution declaring quail a nuisance was rescinded.
  (14)    
    No meeting was held in October or November 1913.
  There was a meeting in December, the last for which there
are minutes available.   A petition was sent to the
Government praying for a new dredge on the Tarawera River.
  The League decided to affiliate with the United Bay of
Plenty Railway League.   The meeting was informed by F. Burt
that the County Council had made arrangements about the pound
and A. Parkinson had refused to accept the position of
poundkeeper and had recommended Mr Homes [sic].   With
regard to shipping matters it was decided to call a special
meeting of all those interested and finally deal with the
correspondence now held by the League re shipping.   The
League wrote to the Hon. W. Fraser expressing their
appreciation of how the Minister had understood the
requirements of the district and in placing of a substantial
vote for the East Coast Railway   (15)  .  
    Since the League had joined the United Bay of Plenty
Railway League, the Matata meetings must have continued for
some time.   Correspondence addressed to the Matata League
in 1914 has survived.   However the 1912 and 1913 minutes,
and correspondence both outward and inward offer a window on
the small community at the time.   The effect of the
League 's activities outside of Matata was minimal.   Letters
to officialdom were always politely responded to in the style
of the period, the answer invariably containing the
information that the matter was under consideration, or was
being passed on to the appropriate office for comment.   Two
cases in point illustrate official attitudes: in regard to the
Postmistress being appointed a Registrar the Minister of
Internal Affairs replied through his Secretary that the matter
had been referred to the Registrar-General for report&semi;
  (16)   and with regard to the telephone line from
Whakatane the Assistant-Secretary of the General Post Office
replied that to provide the desired facilities it would be
necessary to erect a metallic circuit for the whole distance,
and the provision of that would be considered only if ten
persons undertook to become subscribers at Matata. 
  (17)     The impact of the League 's activities was
negligible, and in the event the decision about the route of
the railway would have been taken on other considerations than
the case put by Matata for Matata.   However the effect of
its existence was of more consequence in Matata itself where
the interests of the Europeans, scattered as they were in
location, were drawn closer together in defence of their young
settlement.   Exchange of views and discussion was an
element in social consciousness and cohesiveness.   There
appears to have been no Maori input in the League though, as
regards Sections 103 and 104 the League was advised by the
Department of Lands and Survey that the land in question was
Native Freehold but that the ownership had not yet been
determined by the Native Land Court.   That was as close as
the League got to Maori interests at that time.
  (18)    
    Correspondence with other Leagues and associations
where similar interests prevailed all went to establishing a
wider Bay of Plenty-East Coast feeling of having a common
cause.   If there had been a feeling of resentment towards
those who had a railway connection prior to 1912 the issue
over the route of the railway, and when it would be built
engendered a fierce determination in the coastal Bay of Plenty
not to be left behind in the development stakes.   The
Matata League was a reflection of what was afoot elsewhere.
  Each saw itself individually but called on the others
collectively to advance the cause.   In the event there were
few tears shed for those who were by-passed, as was Te
Teko.  
      Eighty years on it is interesting to focus on the
Matata Railway, Roads and Bridges League, for it came into
existence primarily to assert its claim for the railway,
indeed as a railway junction.   The gathering of malcontents
then soon discovered other shortcomings in their small
community which they sought to have the Government redress.
  All that could be pursued while they awaited the awful
hour of decision regarding the railway.   There was almost a
light-hearted sigh of relief and a turn to more trivial
difficulties after the Hon. W. Fraser communicated to them the
confirmation of the coastal route.   Their moment of
gratification came briefly, and went.   Te Teko, Opotiki and
Whakatane survived without the rail.   Matata got the
Rangitaiki Outlet to increase its hinterland, it achieved its
rail connection but lost its port.   The extent to which the
settlement subsequently capitalised on its good fortune
continues to be a matter for historical judgement after all
those eighty years.  
  references      
  

        THE PRIVATISATION OF SOCIAL ASPIRATION:
TRADE UNIONS IN NEW TIMES    
    Pat Walsh  
        Individual choice appears as a
neutral ideology, which everyone can ascribe to.   But it
has justified growing inequality, the collapse of social
cohesion and the abandonment of social responsibility.   It
is Thatcherism 's most fundamental and extensive
privatisation: the privatisation of social aspiration,
obligation and responsibility   ('Manifesto for New
Times',   Marxism Today  , September 1989).    
    If the privatisation of social aspiration, obligation
and responsibility is a defining feature of New Times, then
the future for trade unionism, at least as traditionally
understood, may be bleak.   The essence of trade unionism is
its collective character, premised upon the socialisation of
aspiration, obligation and responsibility.   Trade union
organisation works through the notion that there are common
interests widely shared among workers, who recognise this and
are prepared to act together to achieve their interests.
  Trade unions also recognise and try to reconcile divergent
interests among their members, but require members to accept
that their own particular interests may be compromised in
favour of those of other members whose needs may be greater,
or whose strategic position is more favourable.   Moreover,
unions also expect that members will at times be willing to
make sacrifices in support of the cause of other members.
  These collective and solidaristic principles, and the
assumption of common interests which underpin them, are
fundamentally at odds with New   Times'  
privatisation of social aspiration, obligation and
responsibility, and with their underlying principle of the
primacy of individual preference.  
    Trade unions have historically offered their members
uniform solutions to general problems.   For this version of
trade unionism to continue to be effective, workers must
continue to believe that on balance their interests are best
served by general solutions to the problems they meet at work.
  In a broad sense, unions must face up to two issues.
  The first is whether collective solutions are always or
even usually appropriate.   The second, less commonly
remarked upon but potentially more radical for unions, is the
degree to which problems are still collectively experienced
and defined.  
    Traditional (Old Times) trade unionism - uniform
solutions to general problems - prospered by responding
principally to the needs of a relatively homogeneous section
of its membership, whose personal circumstances and
occupational interests were fairly similar.   These union
members were male Pakeha, and were permanent full-time
workers, rewarded by length of service with the same employer
(pay, allowances, promotion, job security, and for some,
superannuation).   Their needs and interests tended to be
given higher priority in unions than those of others.   This
was partly due to the legacy of the late entry of other groups
into the unionised workforce.   Most female dominated
occupations, for instance, did not become unionised until
after the introduction of compulsory unionism in 1936,
whilst the numbers of Maori and Pacific Island people in the
unionised workforce grew rapidly after the second world war.
  As importantly, the relative priority given to certain
interests over others reflected the political dominance of
male Pakeha within trade unions and their control over
decision  -  making structures, which were themselves made
in their image.  
    Union membership in New Times is much more segmented.
  The composition of the unionised workforce and the terms
on which they are employed have changed considerably.
  Women, Maori and Pacific Island people make up a much
higher proportion of union membership than they did two or
three decades ago.   Union members, whether male or female,
are increasingly likely to have child-care
responsibilities.   More union members are employed on a
part-time or temporary basis, whilst a growing number are
outworkers or homeworkers, or on contract.  
    The segmentation of union membership has been
accompanied by parallel changes in the politics of trade
unionism.   The political dominance of male Pakeha within
particular unions has been challenged by increased activity by
women, Maori and Pacific Island people.   Traditionally
inactive, female-dominated unions, such as those representing
clerical workers, bank officers, cleaners and shop employees,
have become active for the first time and have vigorously and
successfully promoted non  -  traditional issues within
the wider trade union movement.   In addition, unions have
responded to general shifts in social attitudes and
conventions.  
    The more differentiated union membership becomes, the
more workers will tend to identify different issues as
requiring attention.   Women will give pay equity
higher priority than men&semi;   Maori will give tangihangi leave
higher priority than non-Maori&semi;   the Samoan hospital cleaner
who frequently acts as a translator for medical staff wants
recognition for language skills&semi;   parents will give child-care
and parental leave higher priority than non-parents&semi;   some
members may wish to change the normal hours of work and work
at ordinary time rates from much earlier in the morning to
give them the afternoon off, whilst others, in different
family circumstances or without access to personal or public
transport early in the morning, will oppose any change&semi;
  part-timers want better career prospects and the right to
remain a part-timer in senior positions&semi;   permanent workers may
give superannuation a high priority while temporary workers
want the best possible conditions right now.  
    These developments pose major problems for unions.
  Not only are their members more inclined to make different
judgements about solutions to problems, but increasingly they
identify different issues as problems.   And, the more open
and pluralistic union politics becomes, the more likely it is
that winning coalitions can be forged on a diversity of
issues.   Groups of members are now more likely than in the
past to engage in conflict with other groups about what
constitutes a legitimate problem for the union to allocate
resources to.   The   'privatisation of social
aspiration, obligation and responsibility'   means that
union members, like other groups in society, are less inclined
to accept a duty to promote the interests of others at the
expense of their own.  
    None of this is news of course to any union official
confronted with angry members demanding to know why the union
proposes to hold a hui or a women 's conference, to make a
financial donation to a particular group, to try to get an
improvement in one allowance rather than another, or to give
priority in award negotiations to extending annual or sick
leave provisions over a pay increase.   How do unions
service the increasingly diverse needs of a more segmented
membership, in a period of growing social and economic
distress and in circumstances in which industrially and
politically unions feel themselves on the defensive?
  Moreover, as we shall see below, management has been quick
to exploit this by claiming to workers that it can provide the
flexibility necessary to accommodate the diverse needs of
different groups of workers.   The dilemma for
under-resourced unions and for union officials facing already
impossible workloads is how to make the shift from Old Times
to New - from uniform solutions to general problems to
specialised solutions to particular problems - in a manner
which maintains the organisational cohesion of the union.  
    These issues also raise the important question of the
relationship between the union and its members.   Even to
pose the question in this way is partially to answer it, for
it implies a sense of separation between members and the union
hierarchy.   In the private sector, this separation was
encouraged by the historical development of trade unions in
New Zealand.   Crucial to it was their dependence on state
institutions of compulsory arbitration, compulsory membership,
award enforcement and monopoly jurisdiction, combined with the
Arbitration Court 's general wage adjustments.   This was
reinforced by statutory constraints on their structure,
operation and the membership services they could deliver.
  These factors contributed to a trade unionism in which
membership participation and membership servicing were neither
important nor encouraged.   Most state sector unions did not
enjoy the luxury of compulsory membership, but from the 1940s
onwards, their reliance upon fair relativity with the private
sector, enforced through compulsory arbitration, meant most
were not significantly different from their private sector
counterparts.   Not all unions fitted this model of course,
as Bollinger 's classic (1968) study of the Seamen 's Union
makes plain, but the number of significant exceptions was not
large.  
    As the institutional and wider social and economic
environment for unions changed, and the statutory protections
they previously enjoyed were stripped away, unions have been
forced to shift to a different model of organisation which
stresses reliance upon strategic location in the economy,
membership solidarity and commitment and effective
leadership and analysis at the centre (Brosnan, Smith, and
Walsh, 1990, ch.7).   In this model, membership
participation and servicing become vital lynch-pins of the
organisation, and unions cannot prosper where there is a
pervasive sense of separation between the membership and the
union hierarchy.  
    Unions in New Zealand have been gradually shifting
towards this model over the last two decades.   The
consolidation of   delegates'   structures in unions where
previously there were none, the reallocation of union
resources to the employment of organisers, especially at
regional level, the remarkable growth in the union education,
the very considerable expansion in the range of services
offered to members, the emergence of special
representational structures for women, Maori (less common) and
(still rare) Pacific Island people, the upsurge in different
forms of communication with members, and, in a number of
unions, significant constitutional and structural reforms have
all been part of this shift.   Ironically, but
unavoidably, these changes encourage the realisation and
expression of divergent views, as members involve themselves
in their union and begin to consider precisely what their
interests are.   The very process of change which unions
needed to undergo sets in motion developments which may
challenge the organisational cohesion of the union.    
    The shift by unions to a participatory organisational
model oriented to servicing the diverse interests of a
segmented membership, has been hindered by two sets of
factors.   One is the legacy of the past - the
understandable persistence of the earlier orientation in the
attitudes and actions of both officials and members.   Until
very recently, improvements in pay and conditions for most
workers dropped out of the sky as a result of a process which
they had very little to do with (Campbell and Kirk, 1983).
  Improvements came either from some deal between the
Government and the central organisations of unions and
employers, from Government directly, or as a relativity
flow-on from gains won through industrial struggle by other
groups of workers.   In the latter process, workers at all
levels throughout the economy (including those covered by the
Higher Salaries Commission, such as MPs) depended upon the
vigour and commitment of the particular union, usually the
engineers or the drivers, cast in the role of leading the
award round for that year.   Other unions only infrequently
required their own members to emulate their counterparts in
the lead union.   Most workers came to expect improved
working conditions to emerge out of a process mediated by
their union, but which did not involve them in significant
industrial struggle.  
    These attitudes live on in the widespread expectation
that union members have over particular issues that the union
should  'do something'.   However, those members do not
expect that they will have to strike to achieve their
objective.   It is assumed that, as in the past, the union
can  'do something' independently of the loyalty and commitment
of union members.   Beneath this is a mistaken perception of
the union as something separate from its members with
resources and capacities of its own.   On the other side,
some union officials, accustomed to the comfortable ways of
the past, and uneasy with an active role for the membership,
which they see as potentially threatening and disruptive, work
to prevent the shift to more participatory structures.
  They too see the union as something separate from the
membership, and acquire a proprietorial attitude towards the
organisation.  
    An unintended by-product of the shift to a service
orientation is that it may encourage the very sense of
separation which it is designed to overcome.   The more that
unions offer their members a smorgasbord of services, the more
the members may come to take a detached view of the union as a
service organisation to which they pay a fee and from which
they expect to receive various benefits, including improved
employment conditions, without needing to struggle for these
gains themselves.   This belief that consumer or client
needs can be satisfied by payment of the appropriate fee is a
typical characteristic of New Times.   Its emergence among
union members, a product of seemingly necessary organisational
shifts by unions to accommodate New Times, may ultimately be
inimical to traditional patterns of trade union organisation
and activity.   This is of course not necessarily a major
problem for unions, which are able to adapt organisationally,
but it is important that unions consider the possible
implications of their shift to a service orientation.  
    Other considerations making it difficult for unions to
shift to an organisational model appropriate to New Times are
factors central to New Times itself.   The increasing
globalisation of economic activity and the dominance of
economic production by large transnationals pose major
problems for trade unions trying to manage change and respond
effectively to membership demands (Enderwick, 1989).
  Unions are unable to match the vast resources of the
transnationals, and have difficulty competing effectively
with them in the domestic industrial relations context.
  Secondly, the transnational companies, if faced by
resistant workers, are often able and willing to shift their
operations to compliant workforces in different regions,
countries or even continents.   Trade unions in New Zealand
have faced this problem in footwear, clothing and in other
industries which prospered under now discarded policies of
import protection.  
    Trade unions typically have developed as domestic
organisations.   They find it very difficult to organise
internationally or even to coordinate among national union
movements.   Workers benefiting from the transfer of
production to their country are unlikely to support workers in
another country who have lost their jobs.   Moreover, the
new workforce has been selected precisely because of its
industrial docility.   The dominance of transnationals also
places great competitive pressures upon domestic producers,
and contributes to a harsher environment for their workers
also.   The economic recession of the 1980s heightened
worker vulnerability and placed unions firmly on the
defensive.  
    These circumstances gave rise to important changes in
the structure and operation of management.   As
international and domestic economic activity become much more
competitive, cost-conscious firms responded with policies
designed to reduce costs and gain competitive advantage.
  This has seen the emergence of what initially became known
in the industrial relations literature as strategic management
(Kochan, Katz, and McKersie, 1986), but which later became
more widely identified as human resource management.   A key
objective of human resource management is to weaken the
organisational base for unions among workers.   Indeed
internationally, many human resource managers aim for a
union-free environment, and they pursue this with varying
strategies depending on the particular legislative, industrial
and political circumstances they find themselves in.
  During the 1980s, firms tended to find these circumstances
favourable to their interests, as right-wing governments did
away with traditional legislative protections unions had
enjoyed, whilst replacing them with new restrictions on trade
union freedom of action, and dismantled or ran down the state
agencies responsible for the regulation or enforcement of
employment conditions, including occupational health and
safety.   In New Zealand, a curious mix of government
policies prevailed, some of which strengthened union
organisation, whilst others undermined it in significant
ways.  
    An important element of those strategies has been the
reassertion of managerial control and a corresponding
diminution in union power.   In New Zealand, this strategy
has been most prominent in some of the new state-owned
enterprises (Walsh, 1988).   It has also been an important
component of the new approach to public sector management in
the core state sector, and has been followed in many private
sector companies also.  
    A key aspect, and one central to New Times, is the
appeal management makes to workers as individuals and the
promise of individual satisfaction.   Increasingly, managers
seek to cultivate individual loyalty and create new bonds
between employees and the firm.   Workers are encouraged to
believe that their interests coincide with those of the firm
or organisation, and that senior management will ensure that
those interests are met.   Central to this strategy is the
effort by managers to establish a new relationship with their
employees which does not involve the union.   Thus human
resource managers try to deal directly with employees,
by-passing and undermining the union.   Managers seek to
convince workers that all the benefits of unionisation and
collective bargaining can be provided by the employer, without
the difficulties that come with union membership and
industrial activity.   In this strategy, they are aided by
the very difficulties that unions have in coping with the new
diversity of membership interests.   Managers try to
capitalise on the privatisation of social aspiration.
  Where there is membership dissatisfaction with union
policy or practice, managers hold out the hope that the point
at issue can be remedied through management rather than the
union.  
    Thus, in the SOEs and in the core state sector, there
has been a great emphasis upon removing managerial-level
employees from the coverage of their collective agreement and
placing them upon individual contracts of employment.   It
is argued that employees can have employment conditions
tailored specifically to their individual needs which could
not be met through the collective agreement.   Individual
contracts are also seen as a way of creating and sustaining
organisational hierarchies by developing a  'management
culture' in which the authority of management is reinforced
over lower-level employees.   The placing of employees at a
point within a range of pay rates, based upon job evaluation
and managerial assessment of performance, rather than
automatic progression up the steps on a scale, directly ties
  employees'   personal rewards to their relationship with
management.   It encourages the notion that assessment and
rewards are now objective, and that a competent individual
will progress satisfactorily without needing to rely upon
their union to protect them.  
    At lower levels, union strength is challenged by the
shift to post-Fordist technologies.   This grew out of the
harshly competitive nature of economic activity and out of
related changes in consumer preferences.   No longer could
firms compete on price alone.   Demand for standardised
products at the lowest price was replaced by an increasingly
differentiated market demanding specialised high-quality
products.   The need to meet these demands required new
technology.   It is argued that flexible specialisation
eclipsed mass production and reordered traditional systems of
work organisation upon which unions had patterned their own
organisation and activity (Piore and Sabel, 1984).  
    In this argument, employers seek to make effective
union organisation more difficult by establishing the
'flexible firm'.   Flexibility has both a functional and a
numerical component.   Multi-skilling, quality circles, team
briefings, consultative committees, performance pay again,
financial participation and other aspects of functional
flexibility, all of which grew up around post-Fordist
technology, speak to a radically different way of organising
social relations at work.   These changes, although made
possible by technological advances, have been encouraged by
human resource managers as a means of establishing new
loyalties between workers and management and undermining
loyalty and commitment to the union.   At this level,
managers seek to create new group loyalties to replace the
more traditional and more threatening identification with the
whole workforce, and tie those loyalties to the organisation
rather than the union.   By numerical flexibility, employers
also seek to divide the workforce and weaken trade unionism by
establishing a sharp distinction between the core workforce of
permanent full-time employees and the periphery - workers
employed on a part-time or temporary basis or on contract or
as outworkers.   Advocates of the 'flexible firm' thesis see
this form of organisation rapidly replacing the traditional
hierarchical organisational structure previously favoured by
capitalist firms.  
    These concerns about the implications of New Times for
trade unions tie in with a longer-standing sense of trade
unionism in crisis.   This first became a matter of debate
in the United States in the early 1980s, and has extended to
varying degrees to most OECD countries.   These concerns
were initially prompted by developments which preceded
subsequent theorising about New Times.   However, many of
these are now seen to be important elements of New Times.
  Some have been discussed here, whilst others, including
the growth of sub-contracting and temporary and part-time
work, reinforce the unwelcome trends for unions.   This
brief paper has been able to raise only some of the issues
that need to be addressed in assessing the implications New
Times pose for collectivities of workers organised around
common interests in their terms and conditions of
employment.  
    However, a final note of caution, or more precisely
optimism, should be sounded.   These developments are trends
which require careful examination, not least because they tie
in with particular ideas being advanced by powerful groups on
the right.   But, as recent studies are showing, there has
not yet been radical change in employment relations.
  Pollert 's (1988) re-examination of the data for the United
Kingdom offers little support for the more sweeping of the
claims associated with the flexible firm thesis.   Movement
towards functional flexibility has been limited, while most
changes in what are claimed to be the dimensions of numerical
flexibility are better explained by overall shifts in
employment (the decline of manufacturing and the expansion of
the service sector) than by new management policies.   Only
in the public sector has there been significant movement
towards numerical flexibility, a movement Pollert explains
largely in terms of ideology (sub-contracting of activity to
the private sector) or mistaken beliefs about what the private
sector actually does.  
    These reassessments should encourage unions to focus
their attention upon what has actually happened, and what
might reasonably be expected to happen in the medium-term
future.   They will find enough there to concentrate their
minds, without being agitated by the more apocalyptic visions
of the totally flexible workforce.   There are sound reasons
for firms to prefer a coordinated hierarchical structure with
clear control systems - the same reasons which led the large
    transationals    transnationals     to
introduce them in the first place (Chandler, 1977&semi; Williamson,
1975).  
      Reappraisals of trade unionism in OECD countries
in the 1980s do not support a picture of uniform decline
(Rojot, 1989).   In some countries, unions have in fact done
well, despite similar economic conditions as those in other
countries where unions did less well.   Indeed, in the
United Kingdom, where conditions appear to have been least
favourable to unions, the most recent judgements are that
unions coped with the 1980s far better than they coped with
the 1930s, and that they may have emerged from the decade in
better shape organisationally than at the start (McInnes,
1987).   It is important then to specify the circumstances
which contribute to union decline and otherwise, and in
particular, as with assessments of the flexibility thesis, to
distinguish between cyclical and long-term factors.   Much
of the observable decline in union membership in many
countries appears to have resulted from unemployment rather
than worker rejection of unions (Kelly, 1988).  
    For unions, New Times also opens opportunities.
  New participatory attitudes among the membership and in
the wider society create pressures for forms of industrial
democracy, whilst at the same time making members available as
a key resource for unions on a more consistent and reliable
basis than before.   Any significant shift away from
traditional Taylorist production systems towards processes
based on teamwork and multi-skilling makes worker cooperation
more important than in the past.   As Jones and Rose
(1986:57) put it, in their study of work reorganisation,
should unions wait for the right economic conditions for
traditional forms of militancy to return, or should they
    try to widen the loopholes created by
management 's apparent need for some co-determination of
plant-level and production issues and build upon the limited
but concrete gains of some 'pragmatic' shop-floor unionists?
  The danger for unions is that the latter development may,
if ignored or simply dismissed, take off on a course of its
own which they may be unable to influence in
future.      
    Moreover, there are limits to the privatisation of
social aspiration.   The same economic pressures which gave
rise to the development of human resource management, also
lead to employer pressure to worsen employment conditions and
to enhance worker insecurity and vulnerability.   These are
the traditional bases of union organisation.   As employers
press for 'flexibility' over pay and conditions, workers,
threatened by the prospective loss of basic rights and
protections, become prime material for union organising
drives.   Recent examples in New Zealand, such as in the
health sector (Walsh and Fougere, 1989), show that some unions
are in a position to capitalise on this.   Other examples,
including the non-renewal of several key awards in 1989 show
that not all unions are able to do so.   Since one major
union fits into both those categories, it is evident that
union organisation itself is not the only consideration in
shaping outcomes.   Employer structure, ideology and
strategy and the composition, distribution and attitudes of
union membership are as, if not more, important.
  Successful union resistance to employer attempts to
establish a new relationship with their employees will depend
on union   members'   willingness to mobilise against the
loss of employment conditions.   Even in New Times, some
things don't change.    references     