  

        A Vision of Apocalypse    
      I  N THE SKY above Otahuhu the moon turned
to blood.  
    Otahuhu in 1962 was a township half an hour 's drive
from the city of Auckland where, a law student not yet twenty
years old, I lived with my parents, brother and sisters,
brought up on the extraordinary prophecies of the   Book of
Revelation   but not expecting their fulfilment in my
lifetime.   As I walked from the bus stop to my home on a
cold winter evening I saw an eerie lightening of the sky.
  Beams of light radiated from the northern horizon and
intersected with each other through the blackness of the
night.   I climbed to the open balcony on the first floor of
the old house and was arrested with awe as the sky pulsated
with these brilliant shafts of light.   They were red and
white.   They extended across the night like the ribs of a
fan.   They were spinning, they were intermingling.
  The sky was diffused with a ghastly brush of red.   It
was an unnerving spectacle.  
    For all that I told myself it was unlikely that divine
judgment was to be visited on the people of Otahuhu, I
couldn't reason away the chill sweat of dread.   I had seen
in the South Island of New Zealand the majesty of the aurora
australis.   What I saw that night came from the wrong pole.
  The intensity of light and colour was far more extreme.
  But as the minutes passed, it dawned on me that I had not
been promoted to glory.   No fundamentalist rapture had
taken place.   I was still affected by gravity and composure
crept back.   I reverted to my usual dismissal of divine
phenomena.   After about a quarter of an hour the lights
died away.  
    Eventually the radio told us what had happened.
  Thousands of miles north-east of New Zealand, the United
States had tested a one-megaton nuclear weapon at high
altitude by launching it on a rocket and exploding it two
hundred miles above Johnston Island in the Pacific.   The
device had been laced with millions of copper threads.
  They danced in the ionosphere and ruptured the ordered
magnetic fields, which, in spasmodic correction of the
violation, created a nuclear aurora.  
    For me the technical explanation made things worse.
  The confusion in the sky that night haunted me as a vision
of a man  -  made apocalypse, a terrifying retaliation of
natural forces against the evil of unnatural invasion and a
warning that a small country at the edge of the world in the
South Pacific was no longer far enough away from the quarrels
of the great powers to escape their consequences.   It was a
shock to realise that the power of nuclear weapons could
straddle the world and unleash a threat on an inoffensive
country like New Zealand.  
    New Zealand in 1962 was a place apart.   My father,
a doctor with a passing interest in novelties and a watcher of
planes landing at the local airfield, hadn't bought a
television set.   There wasn't a lot of point.   When
television arrived there was one channel in the evenings only,
in grainy black and white.   There were no private radio
stations.   The government owned and ran a commercial and a
non-commercial radio network.   The bars closed at six in
the evening and stayed closed all day on Sunday.   Every
session of the cinema began with a grand rendition of the
British national anthem played by a British military band on
the soundtrack of a film that showed the Queen riding
side-saddle in military attire at the Trooping of the Colour
in London.   Unquestioningly the audience stood when the
first drumroll of the anthem sounded.  
    Just in front of our family house was a small
triangular park containing two monuments.   The first, an
obelisk of sandstone, commemorated a man who died a century
before, twelve thousand miles from his English home,
trying to disposess the native Maori people of their property.
  The second monument was the war memorial.   A
magnificently cast horse bearing a fully kitted-out cavalryman
was mounted on a large concrete plinth on the sides of which
were bronze plaques recording the sacrifices made between 1914
and 1918.   Once a year, on 25 April, the people of Otahuhu
gathered around the war memorial for the Anzac Day
service.  
    More sacred than any Sunday, Anzac Day was named for
the Australia and New Zealand Army Corps and marked the
slaughter these men were consigned to at Gallipoli in 1915.
  The war they fought in not having ended all wars, the day
of their tragedy became a memorial to all who died while
serving New Zealand abroad.  
    My earliest solemn memories are of the Anzac Day
services at Otahuhu.   The main road south from Auckland,
the Great South Road, was closed, and the streets filled with
the townsfolk.   The veterans marched on.   Schoolteachers
and the local grocer and barber looked very different one day
a year, bedecked with medals.   The Salvation Army band led
the hymn singing.   The mayor intoned a remembrance.   The
bugler played the Last Post.   The guard of honour from the
local school cadet unit fired three volleys of blanks.   The
less sensitive of the children ran through the ranks gathering
the spent cartridges.   I only did it once&semi; my father
thought it poor form.   Reveille sounded and the
wreath-laying began.  
    This part of the ceremony was hard to take.   It was
not the official tributes that churned me up - it was seeing
the mothers of school friends placing homegrown bunches of
flowers against the base of the memorial in memory of the
fathers my friends had never seen.   Each year I saw an old
woman place two blooms against the monument, one for her
brother killed at Gallipoli and the other for her son killed
nearly thirty years later in Egypt.  
    There were hundreds of people at the Anzac Day
service.   They all knew each other.   I knew most of them
and they knew me because everyone knew the doctor 's family.
  It was a good time and place to grow up in.   Although I
was the doctor 's son and we lived in a big house, I went to
the same schools as everyone else, talked like everyone else
and felt at home in any house in Otahuhu.   It was that sort
of a town.   The plumber probably earned as much as my
father.   Otahuhu had no unemployment.   Hardly anyone was
out of work in New Zealand.   It was a rich little country
and there didn't seem to be an awful lot to worry about.  
    Otahuhu was no place for a nuclear aurora and its
intrusion shattered my complacency.   The nuclear afterglow
persuaded me that my country was not a Noah 's ark.   There
would be no lucky survivors and no shelters deep enough if the
world went mad.   I was struck by the conviction that the
planet 's future depended on our eliminating any possibility of
nuclear war.    
    Having reached this conclusion, I was unsure how to
act on it.   New Zealand had a military alliance with the
United States, a nuclear power, but nuclear weapons played no
immediate part in our defence.   We were always a bystander.
  Opposition to nuclear testing could only be a show of
feeling.   There wasn't a clear target for our resistance.
  Our impotence was plain when, in the year the nuclear
aurora shone on Otahuhu, France announced that it was moving
its atmospheric nuclear weapons testing programme from the
Sahara Desert to its island territories in the South Pacific.
  My concepts of distance were not then tempered by the
experience of travel, and I assumed that testing on the atolls
of Tahiti was testing next door to New Zealand.   My
new-found fear of nuclear destruction was fuelled by
xenophobia.   The South Pacific was ours, not a laboratory
for the powers of the Northern Hemisphere.   I remember
self-righteously feeling how extraordinarily grovelling
Australia was to allow nuclear weapons to be tested on their
soil by the British.   What the French, and the Americans,
were doing in the Pacific seemed to me to be an affront to the
independence of New Zealand.  
    I didn't join the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament or
any other group formed to protest against nuclear testing.
  It was through my law studies that I was drawn into the
small active protest movement.   I worked part-time through
most of my law degree and in 1962 I got a clerk 's job with
Haigh, Charters and Carthy, barristers and solicitors of
Auckland.   In the early morning I went to lectures at
Auckland University, worked at the office through the day and
went to more lectures in the evening.   Haigh, Charters was
not a wealthy firm.   The office accommodation was dreadful.
  It had the austerity of a Non  -  conformist chapel.
  The workload of the practice was no more fashionable.
  The firm acted for most of Auckland 's trade unions.   It
was heavily involved in the legal defence of political
activists.   It was the legal comforter of the artistic and
literary community.   Haigh, Charters was an exciting firm
to work for if you didn't want to build yourself a reputation
among the moneyed classes.  
    Frank Haigh, the senior partner, was one of Auckland 's
leading advocates.   He represented the maimed, the defamed,
the dissenting and the dispossessed.   Les Charters was the
second senior partner.   He was a great lawyer.
  Disqualified from practice and imprisoned for some years
during the war because of his conscientious objection to
military service, he declined to take the oath of allegiance
to allow him to practise law again until 1958, when he was
sure he was no longer likely to be called up.   Jack Carthy,
a devout Catholic, made up the trio.   He was the general
practitioner of the team.   The agnostic Haigh was highly
catholic in his championing of the right to pursue a cause.
  He acted for a clutch of Christian pacifists, for the
Church of Scientology when it was the subject of a commission
of inquiry, and for the Communist Party of New Zealand.   Of
them all, the last stood lowest in popular opinion.  
    The Communist Party carried a burden of contempt in
New Zealand as elsewhere in the days of the Cold War.   To
public acclaim the National Government in 1951 smashed the
waterfront union.   Some of its influential members were
communists&semi; the odium lingered and politicians raised the
bogey from time to time.   Most of the party 's few members
were sure they were being spied on.   Afraid that their
party would be outlawed and its assets confiscated, they spent
no small part of their income in devising trusts and other
legal shelters which would protect their property when the
government finally lived up to its threats and the axe fell on
them.  
    Under the guise of many names, the Communist Party set
itself to rouse public opinion against atmospheric nuclear
testing over the Pacific ocean.   My employer Frank Haigh
was a regular speaker at protest meetings organised by the
party in Auckland.   Just as my junior role in the office
required me to fetch Frank 's lunch, so I was called on to help
distribute the leaflets which denounced the testing and
announced the times of the rallies and marches.  
    I did not enjoy this part of my job.   I had no wish
to be labelled a 'com'.   I knew too that the limitation of
the protests to atmospheric testing in the Pacific let the
Russians off the hook.   But I thought enough of the cause
not to spurn support for it.   I used to puff my way up from
the office of Haigh, Charters to the squalid headquarters of
the Communist Party.   I remember the   frisson   of
apprehension I felt each time I entered.   I 'd heard enough
tales of surveillance to believe I was being watched.   Nor
was there anything within to attract.   Tucked away in a
seedy arcade, the office offered no welcome.   Neither did
the staff, who sat among piles of boring-looking books, stacks
of unsold party newspapers and always, in what seemed to me to
be a denial of doctrine, the weekly racing tip sheet,
  Best Bets  .   Gathering up my stock of handbills, I
left.   I delivered the leaflets, I marched in the rallies
and I went to the meetings.  
    The nuclear-free movement had an uphill struggle in
the early 1960s.   Although eighty thousand people signed a
petition in 1963 calling for an end to nuclear testing in the
Southern Hemisphere, there was nothing in New Zealand to
match the mass protests organised by the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament in Britain.   The marches here were poorly
attended&semi; we counted it a successful meeting when the numbers
reached the hundreds.  
    The United States had a test site at Christmas Island
in the Pacific.   It was bomb testing at Easter on Christmas
Island that led to the public protest meeting I now best
remember.   The blasphemous combination sparked more than
the usual interest.   The smaller of Auckland 's two town
halls was almost filled with trade unionists, the women
members of the League for Peace and Freedom, academics and a
heavier-than-usual representation from the churches.   The
speakers all denounced the testing and were dutifully
applauded.   There wasn't a lot of passion in it - the
audience had come convinced and needed no conversion.  
    The meetings never gave anyone much trouble.   The
police were not called on and the government was unmoved.
  Indeed, the gatherings probably gave comfort to the
authorities because of the small support they attracted.
  The Auckland morning paper could always be relied on to
alert its readers to the presence of communists among the
speakers.   While some were of Marxist leaning, most came
from the churches or had a background of humanitarian concern.
  Almost all those protesters I met reeked of sincerity and
goodness.   They were indulged by the authorities and
tolerated, even respected, by the wider public for their
standing in the community and for their record of good works.
  The cause itself and their commitment to it left small
impression.   They hadn't learned to lobby or to cobble
together any coalition of support.  
    The efforts of the Communist Party to make the
nuclear-free movement its instrument were dismally
unsuccessful.   I was too often the witness of its
insularity and incompetence to have any doubt of that.   Its
members lived as aliens in their own country, isolated and
ineffective.   The great irony is that the nuclear-free
movement in New Zealand was finally set alight not by the
efforts of the communists but by the actions of the Western
powers.  
    American intervention in Vietnam created the first
genuinely popular protest movement in New Zealand.   The
United States asked that its small but undeniably respectable
ally make a show of support by taking part in the war.   The
National Government complied.   The war served no obvious
New Zealand interest&semi; for the first time in its history the
country was involved in a conflict it was not unpatriotic to
oppose.   A protest movement emerged whose national pride
was obvious and whose sincerity was not easily questioned.
  It learned to test its powers of organisation and
persuasion against the government.   Any seditious or
communist elements were rapidly overwhelmed by the mainstream.
  Protesters abandoned the limitations of musty halls
and painfully duplicated circulars.   They took to the
streets, captured the churches, absorbed the universities.
  The papers were full of them.  
    The swelling tide of protest against New Zealand 's
involvement in the Vietnam War swept up the small
nuclear-free movement, absorbed its energies, and for the
time being obscured its aims.   But all the energy, idealism
and skill the protest movement had thrown up came very much to
a loose end when the war in Vietnam petered out.   The
movement was left, as it were, looking for a cause to
champion.  
    France in the meantime continued its programme of
nuclear weapons testing in the sky above Moruroa Atoll in the
South Pacific.   This was not the immediate focus of any
popular protest, although public concern about its harmful
effect was widespread.   There was in fact no reason for
protest.   In 1972 the National Government was defeated&semi; the
new Labour Government decided to capture the mood of the
country and become a protester itself by making a commitment
to international action against nuclear testing.   In a
striking move designed to focus world attention on the testing
at Moruroa, the government sent two of its small fleet of
frigates into the test zone.   A member of the Cabinet was
aboard one of them in July 1973 as the French tested a
five-kiloton weapon about twenty miles away, above the atoll.
  The gesture was reinforced when, together with Australia,
New Zealand challenged France at the International Court of
Justice at The Hague as to its right to explode nuclear
weapons in the atmosphere.   The case was adjourned when
France gave way to international opinion and announced that it
would in future carry out the tests below the surface of the
atoll.  
    The Labour Government 's next move was to set out to
win international support for the creation of a nuclear-free
zone in the South Pacific.   Its proposal was adopted in
principle at a meeting of the member countries of the South
Pacific Forum in July 1975 and received the endorsement of the
United Nations General Assembly later the same year.   But
that was as far as it went.   In November 1975 it was time
again for a general election.   Labour lost, the National
Party won, and no more was heard of the nuclear-free zone.  
    The Labour Government 's concern for the impact of
nuclear testing on the environment did not bring it into
direct conflict with the United States.   Conventionally
powered vessels belonging to New Zealand 's American ally
paid occasional calls at New Zealand ports.   Some of them
may have been nuclear-armed, but the possibility aroused no
public concern.   The visits of nuclear-powered vessels
would, in the climate of the time, have caused some
consternation, but none came calling.   Their absence was
not, for most of the government 's term in office, a cause of
friction.   It was not until 1975 that the United States
formally accepted legal liability for damage caused by
accidents involving its nuclear-powered vessels, and having
done so, once again expected its ally to welcome their
visits.  
    If the United States put pressure on the Labour
Government in its last few months in office to accept a
resumption of visits by nuclear-powered ships, I did not hear
of it.   I was the Labour Party 's candidate in the Hobson
electorate and was not in the confidence of members of the
government.   Hobson was a large rural electorate, far in
the north, and it was in the nature of New Zealand politics
that the Labour candidate was not going to win it.   For
most of the voters I was living evidence of the creeping
socialism the National Party warned about.   Yet curiously
enough, at the old settlement of Kerikeri there was one of the
nurseries of the nuclear-free movement.   Its warmth, its
music and dramatic societies and its acceptance of the exile
had made the town a magnet for the unorthodox.   Many faiths
prospered.   Among Anglicans and Methodists were gathered
Christian Scientists and Quakers and a smattering of old
Christian socialists.   Many among them had begun to
question the alliance between New Zealand and the United
States, with its underpinnings of nuclear ships and
nuclear weapons.   These pacifists of Kerikeri were very old
and very idealistic.   They were much given to prayer,
invocation and argument: the theistic equivalent of the
secular communists.   They did not reflect the mainstream of
New Zealand opinion about nuclear issues, and in that sense
the Hobson electorate perfectly reflected the whole of New
Zealand.  
      I was soundly beaten.   I went back to Auckland
and my legal practice.  
    Then there loomed on the horizon the prospect of
sudden death by nuclear explosion or lingering death by
leakage of nuclear radiation.   The newly victorious
National Government, led by red-baiting, round-headed Robert
Muldoon, ever anxious to win the favour of the United States,
invited the visit of the nuclear-powered cruiser USS
  Truxtun  .   Here was the spark that set alight the
protest movement.  
    When it was first understood that the United States
was anxious to resume its programme of visits by
nuclear-powered ships, a protest group was formed in Auckland,
calling itself the Peace Squadron.   Its guiding spirit was
a liberation theologian, the Reverend Dr George Armstrong.
  An engaging man of great vitality and considerable
scholarship, he invited the churches and the non-religious
peace groups to join him in mounting a marine protest.   The
Peace Squadron planned to use small boats to sail the channels
of Auckland Harbour and physically bar the way of the
intrusive nuclear technology.   So began a series of
water-borne demonstrations that were to mark the visit of
every nuclear-powered vessel.  
    I knew George Armstrong and many of his fellow
demonstrators through church activities, through my
brother, who took to the water to try to defeat the intentions
of the United States Navy, and through the potters and
artists, friends of my brother, who had decided to commit
themselves to protest against the visits of nuclear-powered
vessels.   Among them were many of those whose instinct for
protest as a political activity had been honed in the
demonstrations against the Vietnam War.   I made no attempt
myself to take part in the water-borne protests: although I 'm
fairly buoyant, I had no sailing experience.   But it was
understood that the demonstrators were going to find
themselves in confrontation with the police and that some
of them would need a legal defence.   I warmed to the
thought.  
    In October 1976, the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier
USS   Long Beach   sailed towards Auckland.   It came
for what the Americans called rest and recreation.   If its
visit had any military purpose beyond the need to impress the
public with the destructive powers of our American ally, I
was not aware of it.   Nonetheless I resented its visit&semi;
I simply didn't like the presence in the harbour of nuclear
weapons.   The Peace Squadron gathered together a flotilla
of small craft and set out to sail across the narrow channel
down which the   Long Beach   must enter the
harbour.  
    On the morning of its arrival there was a flurry of
activity.   The harbour authority had designated certain
areas off limits and dispatched its vessels, its officers and
the police on board, to make sure the channel was cleared.
  Small boats darted across their path.   In the shadow of
Rangitoto Island at the entrance to the harbour, dwarfing its
opponents and its guardians both, bulked the   Long
Beach  .   Into the fray set off the yacht
  Dolphin  , captained by its owner Phil Amos, once a
minister in the Labour Government.     Dolphin  
sailed up the channel towards the advancing   Long
Beach  , then Phil turned his yacht around and motored
slowly down the channel back to Auckland, the vast vessel
looming ever closer behind him.   Not long after he made his
turn the police intervened&semi; the   Dolphin   was
shepherded out of the channel and captain and crew were taken
on board the police launch.      
  

        THAT SHRINKING FEELING    
  cartoon  
      W  HEN DINAH MEETS Roy in Carrie Fisher 's
new best-selling novel,   Surrender the Pink  , they get
straight to the point.   Not sex.   Psyche-peeping.
  Dinah 's big hang-up - and Steven Spielberg has just paid
US$1 million for the screen rights to this - is that she keeps
falling for men who are "approval withholders".   Writes
Fisher:   "This is why Dinah was bad with men ... when
she was very little, about two, her father went
away."    
    Roy has emotional problems with his girlfriend.
    "The bad thing,"   he tells Dinah,
  "is that if she 's f****** someone else, I 'll get
artificially hotter for her and I don't want to force her into
a life-long relationship where she has to keep having sex with
other people to keep me interested in her."    
    It 's hard to avoid the feeling that what these people
need is some Primal Shrug therapy, or at the very least a
course on How to Overcome Self-doubt Through Simple Pretense
and Ostentation.   It 's also hard to avoid the voyeuristic
feeling that this is all a thinly veiled version of Fisher 's
own diary.   It 's the same with   Postcards from the
Edge  , the novel on which the Meryl Streep movie is based.
  Here, Fisher 's central character, Suzanne, has been
through addiction therapy (just like Fisher) and displays a
whole new set of hang-ups.   As she tells her shrink:
  "What worries me is, what if this guy is really the
one for me and I haven't had enough therapy to be comfortable
with having found him?"    
    What to do?   What to do?   Fisher, who at times
appears to be one of those SICK (successful, intelligent,
coherent and knowledgeable) people who like to think they have
an odd id, did what 40 percent of all Americans are now
reported to do - she got the problem analysed.   Even the
English are doing it: John Cleese has had "an association"
with family therapist Robin Skynner since the mid-70s, when
his first marriage broke up.   Together, they 've written the
best-selling   Families and How to Survive Them   and
are now releasing a six-part radio programme dealing with such
questions as,   "Why do people decide to marry each
other?"     Skynner answers that a person is often
attracted to someone of similar background who has missed the
same stage of development - because of an absent father,
perhaps, or that old bogey "excessive mothering".   Therapy
didn't prevent Cleese 's second marriage from breaking up.
  But he has now found happiness with - yup - a
psychotherapist.  
    Even those who don't want it get psychoanalysed.
  The punks, with their black leathers and studs, T-shirts
printed with images of rape and murder, and artificially torn
and soiled clothing intended all this as a decent,
self-respecting attempt to shock and offend.   Psychologists
saw it as a demand, not just for attention but for love and
care.   They pointed to the damaged baby-indicators: the
hairless heads, pale faces, scraped knees, torn jeans,
ill-fitting, half-undone jackets and leggings.   The dog
chains that often linked one leg to another gave the wearer
the short, halting, appealing gait of a toddler.   And the
outsize safety-pin motif simply reinforced the baby image.  
    There are just so many   rules   now.   We all
have to be active listeners, although the subscript to "I
hear what you 're saying" has now become "and I violently
disagree with you so I 'm using this phrase as a condescending
put-down".   Neuro-linguistic programming forbids the use of
one 's normal visual mode - "I   see   what you mean, I
get the   picture  " - when someone tries to communicate
in kinetic terms: "Things   feel   real   heavy  
man, it 's just like I can't   handle   it any more."  
    We can't be road warriors any more:
"    Outa    Out of     my way, sucker." We 're now
road   worriers  , wondering whether the fact that we
sometimes sort of accidentally go slow in the fast lane or at
the lights is evidence of "Passive Aggressive Procrastinator
Syndrome": provoking and irritating other drivers as a sign of
displaced aggro.   And transactional analysis means you
can't even say, "If it weren't for you" to a partner, because
it probably means that you deliberately picked a domineering
mate who prevents you from doing things you were too scared to
do anyway.    
    Sportspeople, for whom a session on the couch once
referred to the after-match party, are now into "positive
visualisation" and understanding that temper or tanking
(withdrawing emotional involvement and effort) are both simply
means to avoid the unpleasant emotions of nervousness and
fear.  
    And as for all the pop-psychology books around, well,
Auckland psychologist Barry Kirkwood sees them as generally
positive.   The Gestalt, TA and Rational Emotive therapies
were first picked up 30 years ago by people like Dale Carnegie
and have now been joined by a plethora of methods right
through to New Age communing-with-dolphins therapists.
  Many books, says Kirkwood, are similar to evangelical
Christianity: they involve personal testament, positive
affirmation and also have a moral component: to be successful
you have to believe that what you 're doing is right.   Many
are just like sales-training programmes: there 's goal-setting,
monitoring, positive role-modelling, positive visualisation
and positive reinforcement.   Kirkwood:   "It 's all
good, optimistic stuff.     It 's all, 'So what if your
father left when you were two, wow, the same thing happened to
me and I used behaviour modification and look at me
now.'  "    
    Not all
    pyschologists    psychologists     agree with
him.   In   Understanding Psychology  , Ken Richardson
points out that   "...psychology is in a bit of a mess
at the moment, full of self-doubt about its aims and
objectives,   disagreeable   about what is currently
'good' psychology..."   (my italics).   Richardson
maybe meant to write "disagreeing" there.   I think it 's
what you call a Freudian slip. Therapy, perhaps?    
        SOCIALISM? NO THANKS, WE'RE
GREENIES    
  photo  
    The green movement is reformist and middle class.
  JOHN STEWART argues that unless it captures the
imagination and involvement of the working class it will have
little political impact.  
    Green politics has many mansions.   Its spectrum
ranges from extreme individualistic anarchism to the
eco-socialism of a section of the German Greens&semi; from
"clip-on" environmentalism to ecologism, from value-oriented
conservatives, to the last fragments of the socialist Left.
  To cover the possibilities and label them, European Greens
have taken to talking in terms of "pale Greens", "mid Greens",
and "dark Greens".   The blight of semantic death has moved
from the committee meetings of the "old Left", into the
gatherings of the Greens.  
    In this country the eco-socialists of the Values
Party, the world 's first green party, were smothered and
eventually suffocated by an alliance of 1970 's liberal
trendies and the flower power of the "alternative life
stylers".   These two groups independently held the view
that the capitalist system should not, or could not be
challenged.   The "alternative life stylers" withdrew into a
haze of pot-induced communal bliss, and suggested that this
provided the answer to the problems of alienation in the
working environments of a capitalist "democracy".  
    The liberal trendies personified by Messers Clough and
Kunowski (Values Party leaders 1974-79), despite using vaguely
socialist rhetoric, really believed that it was possible to
civilise the dominant capitalist enterprises and protect the
environment by persuasion -- or if that didn't work, by
legislation.   Ultimately many of these people flirted with
Bob Jones and the New Zealand Party and then moved to become
cheer leaders for Rogernomics, the current ideology of the
Labour Government.   Some can now be seen and heard
addressing right-wing "think" tanks such as the Mont Pelerin
Society.  
    In 1990 the re-emerging "Green" movement in New
Zealand appears to consist predominantly of people searching
for an environmentally benign life style.   In Christchurch,
greenies spend a lot of time "getting attuned", focussing, and
metaphorically holding hands.   There is also evidence to
suggest that the Christchurch Green network is in the process
of being hijacked by Labour Party Greens determined to focus
on the symptoms and not the underlying causes of the
ecological crisis.   Both Labour and National Party "greens"
are a living contradiction in terms.   Both groups have
agendas, driven by election considerations.   Political
opportunism is their hallmark&semi; the achievement or retention of
power their objective.  
    In Wellington, it appears as if a very small group of
busy and opportunistic "real" green politicians are attempting
to launch a Green political style party -- a party without any
socialist overtones.   One of the members of this group,
Stephen Rainbow, in the various academic papers he has written
on the Values Party, consistently attacks what he calls the
Christchurch socialists in that party during the 1974-79
period (Rainbow is a Wellington City Councillor).  
    Further north the Green movement has failed to
re-emerge in any coherent or visible way.   Small groups of
people pursuing green-type objectives -- protecting "old"
buildings, and protesting specific environmental spoliation
issues -- are active, but an overtly green movement is still
to appear.   Various Green micro parties are probably in
existence, but from this distance their activities are not yet
discernable.  
    Nationally, a coherent politically sophisticated New
Zealand Green Party could emerge, but not for at least two or
three years.   Greens are presently on a learning curve and
have some considerable distance to travel.   The problems
they face are a general public antipathy to politics and
politicians, a politically illiterate constituency, and the
conservative and timid attitudes of an as yet mainly
middle-class membership.   Until the Green movement becomes
more than an vehicle for an element of the professional middle
class it will languish eccentrically on the margins of New
Zealand society.   It has to capture the imagination and
involvement of the proletariat -- both working and unemployed.
  It has to become an expression of active people power,
political but not
    convential    conventional    , on the
streets, in the local community, and in the work place.   To
be effective the Green movement has to   help   to
promote and create a countervailing hegemony to the prevailing
culture, conventions and mores of a capitalist society.
  Green candidates in the 1990 elections could help this
process but would not be a substitute for it.   
      THREAT    
    Currently the major threat to the Green movement is to
be found in a mainly middle-class and socially conditioned
misconception that environmentalism provides the key to
establishing and maintaining a sustainable society, not
dramatically dissimilar from the present situation.   In
this respect the foundation members of the world 's first Green
Party, Values, in 1972 were significantly more advanced in
their thinking than their 1990 successors.   Influenced by
the findings of the "Club of Rome", they recognised that there
are limits to growth, both in terms of natural resource
utilisation, pollution, environmental spoliation, and the
social fall-out of the technological revolution.   By the
mid-  70 's a Christchurch-based group of Values members
had begun to formulate a socialist response to this developing
ecological crisis.   They suggested that industrial and
technological processes are the fundamental cause of the
environmental, social, and overriding ecological threat.
  As green socialists appreciated, plundering the planet
also involved plundering people.   The competitive ethos led
to concentrations of power and wealth: the computer based
revolution would wipe out millions of jobs world-wide, and
that as a consequence labour-cost saving would produce
mounting and massive unemployment.  
    These predictions have been realised.   Capitalism 's
inevitable winners and losers syndrome has led in this
country, as elsewhere, to closures, mergers and takeovers,
unemployment, economic decline and social decay.
  Nevertheless the crisis of capitalism did not lead to
radical and progressive change&semi; a sweeping away of the system.
  Capitalism will not miraculously transform itself into
"green-socialism" simply because some senior executives and
managers recognise the physical limits to growth.  
    The motor force of capitalism remains the drive for
profit and individual organisation growth in a competitive
environment.   If that environment is threatened by
ecological realities, intelligent capitalists will combine to
set legislative boundary fences to ensure the survival of
their system.   Laws will be made, designed to punish the
polluters, and protect against environmental degradation.
  The move to "clip-on environmentalism" is a clear
indication that this trend is already in motion.
  Unfortunately the majority of Greenies in New Zealand have
been conned by the media and smooth-talking academics into
endorsing and advocating the environmentalist response.
  Campaigns against wasteful product packaging are visible
expressions of this political strategy.  
    The consequences of "clip-on environmentalism" will be
horrendous, because clearly this approach does not address the
underlying causes of the growing ecological crisis.
  Certainly pollution controls will eventually prevail.
  These controls will increase the cost of production
methods, make industrial organisation more capital-intensive,
reduce labour costs by introducing new technology, and the
synergistic effect of these various strategies will be to
create more inequality and more poverty.   Many
transnationals are, in addition, already exporting pollution,
industrial waste, and environmental degradation to the
low-wage economies of Asia, Africa, and central and South
America.   Eco-fascism becomes a real and immediate
possibility in this scenario.  
    In contrast, true ecologists examine the reasons why
certain technologies, production processes and consumption
patterns were promoted and developed initially.   In
capitalist countries,   "... these reasons have to do
with the logic of capitalist accumulation: increasing amounts
of capital need to be invested profitably, which in turn
requires an increasing flow of commodities and an increasing
consumption of raw materials and energy."   (Andre Gorz
interview,   New Statesman and Society   12 May 1989).
  In brief it is the   logic   of the capitalist
system which leads to ecological mayhem -- to pollution,
environmental spoliation, social breakdown and the consequent
incoherence and alienation, characteristic of western
industrial/commercial societies.   Eastern European
"communist" societies of course also pursued industrial growth
strategies with very serious environmental and social
consequences.   Nevertheless in these countries the drive
for power and status was extrinsic to industrialism unlike
capitalist economies where the profit motive is intrinsic and
endemic in the system.  
    Institutional and organisational responses to these
environmental and social problems are leading to tighter
controls, autocratic management styles, high levels of
structural unemployment, increasing labour casualisation and
unsustainable alienation.
  quote  
  Attempts to put a gloss on these developments by indulging
in the rhetoric of "worker participation", "industrial
democracy" and "quality circles" merely conceal manipulative
techniques designed to maintain hierarchical management
control systems.   Such semantic adventures help to create a
work environment in which workers cheerfully acquiesce in
their own exploitation.   Obviously this illusion cannot be
maintained indefinitely.  
    As we have seen in the 1970 's, and again in the late
1980 's, a small group of eco-socialists recognised that an
appropriate and relevant response needed to be made to the
developing ecological crisis.   They called for a resumption
of the "long march" through the institutions of capitalism.
  They called for the sweeping away of the system.   They
demanded that the people must be empowered.   Consequently
these "green-socialists" advocated the democratising of the
workplace, decentralisation, and the break-up of the centres
of political and economic power.   Significantly
green-oriented socialists understand that the motor of
profit-driven capitalism must be disconnected, if the
environment is to be protected and ecological balance and
harmony restored.  
    Those socialists in New Zealand who grew out of the
Values Party experience of the 1970 's are understandably
sceptical, therefore, of the validity of the current position
of the new wave of "greenism".   Legislative tinkering with
the system seems totally removed from their vision of the
future.   They see a society in which there is scope for the
human spirit to roam free in conditions of relative abundance
and collective responsibility.   Like all true radicals
before them they go to the root of the matter.  
    Apart from a few, mainly survivors of the 1970 's, the
"new wave" of Greens are either proponents of the
technological or legislative "fix", or mystics seeking refuge
in a personal nirvana called the green lifestyle -- a sort of
religious escapism: a hand-in-hand withdrawal from engagement
with the real world.  
    In 1990 we are witnessing the 1970 's revisited.
  All the old "green" strands are in evidence.   All the
old arguments, antagonisms and conflicts within the "green"
movement are resurfacing.   A concentration on spirituality
may illuminate a personal vision, but that vision will remain
an unattainable fantasy, without collective political action
at all levels in society, and an acceptance of social
responsibility.   Hopefully, the harsh realities of living
in a decaying and increasingly capitalistic autocratic nation&semi;
a society in which big brother rules supreme, may well bring
about a melding of the various green currents, and the
development of a coherent, self-disciplined political
movement.   Such an outcome would take at least two or three
years.   With this objective in view let the
consciousness-raising activities of the "green" socialists
continue with even greater urgency, because time is running
out.    
  

          BUILDING THE POVERTY PRISON      
    The National government 's benefit cuts will put the
poor and needy on a subsistence level with little hope of
escape - even though there are other areas of state spending
where big savings could be made.  
      T  HE POVERTY TRAP, the New Right
insist, is an evil, debilitating thing.   Sated with welfare
dollars, the poor are suspected of losing their urge to
compete and are said to be turning up their noses at genuine
job offers.   In acting to close the poverty trap, however,
the government is creating something worse: the poverty
prison.  
    The signs are clear: convicts in New Zealand jails are
fed on a budgeted $3.87 a day, or $27 a week.   When the
experts in Treasury sit down to decide how much money is
enough for other people to live on, they usually multiply the
basic food budget 
  illustration  
by four - and this total budget is supposed to be enough to
meet all the costs of living, food included.   Do this to
the   convicts'   $27 a week food budget and you get $108
- the   precise   figure set by the government as the
new dole figure for 18- to 25-year-olds.  
    This is almost an invitation to steal your daily
bread, rather than try to earn it.   Prisoners have some
cost advantages: their food is bought cheaply in bulk, and a
team of nutritionists ensure that prisoners eat healthy,
balanced diets.   No such luck for the young.
  Law-abiding young people seeking work will - on the new
benefit levels - be extremely lucky if they can afford the
same sort of food they could get in jail.  
    The example shows just how far New Zealand has gone
from the position expressed in the 1972 Royal Commission
on Social Security, which urged that benefits should be set so
that   "everyone is able to enjoy a standard of living
much like that of the rest of the community, and thus is able
to feel a sense of participation and belonging to the
community"  .   The new benefits do the reverse.
  They ensure that the poor and their children will barely
subsist - like prisoners - out beyond the margins of normal
society.  
    The National government did no research to test
whether real people   could   live on the new benefit
levels.   The issue of income adequacy surfaces in the
Treasury briefing paper to the new government (p106 onwards)
and is treated in greater depth in the influential draft paper
by Treasury researchers Edith Brashares and Maryann Ansley.
  Both documents cite the basic household budgets prepared
by the Otago University food marketing research unit.   In
its March 1990 survey, the unit concluded that an adult male
could be fed adequately on $32.05 a week, or $4.58 a day.
  With strict budgeting the food plan estimates that a solo
mother and her child can be fed on $31.03 a week -
astonishingly, this assumes that a healthy child needs only
$1.27 of food a day!  
    The Otago budgets make grim reading: anyone condemned
to live on them would find their only luxuries forever more
would be an occasional spreading of jam, and sugar in their
tea.   It is   only   a food budget&semi; other income
would have to be found to pay for frivolities like soap,
shampoo, washing powder, toothpaste or tampons.   Prices
have also risen about five percent since these costings were
done.  
    Even so, these Otago figures come out remarkably close
to where some of the new benefit levels have been set:
multiply that precious $32.05 food budget by four in the usual
Treasury way and you get very near the new dole level of
$129.81.   It is an utterly arbitrary process&semi; as Treasury
says on page 106 of its briefing paper:   "... some
sources consider it is adequate to multiply by three, others
consider five is a more fair figure."     Treasury has
in fact chosen a miserly extreme&semi; only a few US studies used
three, and the 1972 Royal Commission used five to set its
benefit levels.   The health, living standards and life
chances of thousands of New Zealanders and their children
depend on such whims.  
    And does Minister of Social Welfare Jenny Shipley
think that in 1991 you can feed yourself adequately on $32.05
a week?   Shipley:   "I think that is in the ballpark
of what is adequate."     When one   "builds in
a factor"   like having a vegetable garden, she says,
things vary.     "Quite frankly, the research I
rely on is the marketplace.   If the marketplace cannot pay,
there is no such thing as an arbitrary, isolated, adequacy
level."    
    The whole subject of living standards is one she
treats as a rhetorical question:   "In terms of
adequacy, what is adequate for a family?"     She
shrugs.   An administrative matter, really.
    "We had to make judgments on the whole package
as to where we would pitch the
levels."      
      I  N DEFENDING the benefit cuts, the
government has taken pains to suggest it had no choice.
    "Like the rest of New Zealand,"   Prime
Minister Jim Bolger says,   "the government cannot go on
spending money it does not have."     If left
unchecked, the financial deficit was set to rise to $3.7
billion in 1991-2, and up to $5.2 billion in 1993-4.
  Bolger 's claim is that we cannot continue to fund what he
describes as one of the world 's most generous welfare systems
while the New Zealand economy remains one of the worst
performers in the developed world.  
    This argument (There Is No Alternative) was one of the
central dogmas of Rogernomics - even though the rest of the
world had largely abandoned their monetarist experiments by
the time Roger Douglas began his.   The government, in fact,
continues to spend money it does not have when it sees fit: on
the Anzac frigates, on teacher subsidies to private schools,
and on the $2.018 million it currently uses to subsidise
Bellamys.   This means that the core clientele of Bellamys -
the 97 MPs - each get a taxpayer food and drink subsidy of
$400 a week, three times the new unemployment benefit.
  Using the Otago basic food plan calculations, that $2.018
million Bellamys subsidy would provide meals for 1211
beneficiaries for a year.  
    In other words, if the government wanted to save
money in other ways it could.   If it wanted to raise money
in other ways, it could.   Like the Labour government before
it, National refuses to trouble the wealthy with a capital
gains tax, common in most developed countries.   The benefit
cuts will save the government about $1 billion&semi; a tax on
capital gains cast as wide as the one in the United States
would bring in $1.5 billion in New Zealand&semi; an
Australian-size model would net $200 million.  
    There are even more efficient alternatives.   If
company and income tax for high-earners was put back up to
where it was between 1985 and 1988 - namely at 48 cents in the
dollar, not the current 33 cents - this would recoup $2.4
billion.   Would this sap our initiative?   Somehow, the
entrepreneur heroes of yesteryear managed to have a stock
market boom on a tax rate of 48 cents in the dollar.   Now,
amid a recession, a large hike in company tax would certainly
deal a blow to business as harsh as that now being felt by
beneficiaries.   Unfortunately, the benefit cuts themselves
are going to hit business hard, especially in regions like
Gisborne, Northland and the West Coast, where welfare
dollars are a crucial part of the local economy.  
    Beneficiaries, after all, spend their money on goods
within the local community - they don't tend to import cars
from Japan, or to invest overseas.   Taking $1 billion from
their budgets will further flatten the demand side of the
economy and cause more job losses - a process likely to
accelerate once this year 's budget also makes the wealthy set
aside money to pay for their own social services.   In
rejecting a "borrow and hope" policy, the government seems to
have chosen a "strangle and hope" option.  
    Shipley is undaunted by the prospect.
    "Though no one 's done the figures"   she
senses that the spending money taken out of the economy in
benefit cuts could be balanced -   "closer than many
people realise"   - by the subsequent one percent fall
in mortgage interest rates.   So is she saying that if the
poor are being made to suffer, at least they 're helping the
middle class pay off their mortgages?   You would be
surprised, Shipley says, just how many lower class people
have mortgages.   To date, no exporters have thrown their
hats in the air in celebration and rushed to invest because of
the one percent fall in interest rates - and even this puny
advance seems likely to be wiped out as this year 's business
tax take has plummeted, due to the recession.  
    No one seems to have done the figures either on
whether the benefit cuts are likely to cause an increase in
crime.   Given that people will have less money coming in
legitimately to live on from the state, will they be
forced to resort to crime?   Shipley:   "I have no
idea.     You will need to talk to the people who may be
in that position.  "    
    But in setting benefits at these levels surely she
must have some idea of the social fallout?   The government,
Shipley replies, sees unemployment as being one of the main
causes of social dislocation, including crime, suicide and
illness.   The unemployment trap, as it becomes entrenched,
strikes her as being   "not a good way to run a society
and we intend to turn that around.     There are difficult
decisions involved in doing it.  "    
    While we wait for unemployment to turn around,
Wellington Youth Aid constable Vicki Blake is saying that the
benefit cuts   themselves   will inevitably cause an
increase in crime.   Is she right?   Shipley:   "I
think you have to wait.     Ask me in three
  months'   time when I see the statistics, and I 'll be
able to say yes, there has been a
correlation.  "    
    So we carry out social engineering, and then just wait
and see what happens?     "There is no social test you
can embark on,"   Shipley says defensively,
  "that will tell you tomorrow that if people have more
or less, they will or will not be likely to commit crime.
    They may well be.   I am not prepared to say they
will, because time will tell.  "     In this sense,
the benefit cuts are to be a great New Zealand social
experiment - the poor will be put under extreme pressure, and
the politicians will wait and see how much crime and
malnutrition then follows.  
  photo  
      T  HE CLAIM that New Zealand has one
of the most generous welfare systems in the world - one that
could stand a bit of cutting - rests on shaky ground.
  Scandinavian countries, Canada, and several European
welfare systems have notably more generous features.   Only
in our treatment of 60-plus citizens (now also facing the
knife) are we significantly generous.  
    To "prove" that even after the benefit cuts, New
Zealand beneficiaries would still be better off than
elsewhere, Bolger cites evidence that a solo mother with one
child is better placed (on 39.7 percent of the average wage)
than in Australia (with her benefit set at 28-30 percent of
the average wage).  
    One may well boggle at the "generosity" involved in
asking the New Zealand solo mother and her child to subsist on
less than two-fifths of the average bloke 's wage.   The
living standard and exemptions available to beneficiaries
across the Tasman also make a mockery of Bolger 's claim.
  The Aussie solo mother faces lower food costs and no GST&semi;
federal authorities in Canberra told me that she would not
have to pay prescription charges or   doctors'   fees, and
would also qualify for rates and car registration reductions.
  Aussie senior citizens pick up, in addition, greatly
subsidised travel (including one free trip within their state
a year), telephone subsidies, no TV licences, free spectacles
and other help.  
    Treasury, for its part, has always been a lot more
concerned with gaps closer to home.   The benefit cuts widen
the gap between benefits and wages, and all sorts of good
things are supposed to flow from that: those on benefits will
have an "incentive" to end their dependency on the state and
find a job&semi; the state will spend less on the poor&semi; wages will
fall as the beneficiaries underbid the low paid for jobs&semi; more
jobs will (cross fingers) be created ...   The vision is of
an upward spiral with a smaller and smaller role for the state
in paying for social welfare.  
    Reality, alas, begs to differ.   Wages have been
declining for a decade, while unemployment has gone up, not
down.   Despite New Right horror images of beneficiaries
grown soft on state hand-outs, there is no research evidence
that the work ethic has eroded in New Zealand: the problem is
that there are far too few or no jobs.   In the climate,
slashing $27 off the meagre income of a widow so she will have
an "incentive" to find work is grotesque.  
    Treasury dimly knows this to be true:   "Many
beneficiaries have little choice since, try as they
might,"   Treasury states on page 108 of the briefing
paper,   "no job is available."     This changes
at once back into their usual moralistic tone:
    "However, the rise in numbers and duration of
benefit is large, and if only one in ten beneficiaries have
been influenced in their decisions to remain on the benefit by
the benefits available, the cost is
substantial."      
    So just in case one in 10 is looking for a soft ride -
or one in a thousand, or one in 10,000 - almost all
beneficiaries are to be impoverished.   The state will save
money and   "the incentives to remain in, or form family
relationships, to accept work or make savings"   will be
enhanced.   Given less money, beneficiaries (ie, women) stay
married or get married.   Beneath the jargon lies an ancient
disdain for the moral fibre of the poor.   With a firm hand
they must be, in the words of the pat&eacute;-eating
puritans at Treasury,   "encouraged to look after
themselves"  .  
    Is the margin between benefits and wages such a major
problem?   Few workers should feel tormented by the thought
of others enjoying an easy life on the benefit.   At the
very most only about five percent of workers would get
  more   money on welfare - and few on welfare seem to
be turning down genuine offers of work.   Under the new
regime, anyone who turns down two job offers loses the benefit
for six months - but new Heretaunga MP Peter McCardle, in his
experience as an official with the Employment Service, found
that only a very small minority - about 4-5 percent - would
turn down two valid offers.   These were mainly, he says,
people on the dole with four or five children.  
    Finally, Social Welfare 's own research refutes the
notion that when benefits edge up on wages, people lose their
incentive to work.   In a 1988 study, C H Dominick and
others reported that an impressive 64 percent of solo mothers
in Sweden also do paid work outside the home, even though
their benefit is 94 percent of the average wage!   "This
suggests,"   say the researchers,   "that benefit
rates which are close to some wage rates do not necessarily
act as a disincentive to labour force participation.
    It appears that Swedish solo mothers do not require a
great financial incentive to take up employment, only the
opportunity to do so.  "    
      A  S TREASURY says, the benefit system
should be designed to make the poor   "maintain or form
family relationships"  .   The new benefit levels will
make it harder for women to leave violent or abusive
relationships - does Shipley feel guilty about that?
      "I don't think that 's true.   The benefit
levels are still very adequate ...   I have no doubt that
those in violent relationships who feel compelled to leave,
will leave.   The psychological evidence is that women stay
in violent relationships for reasons other than
money."      
    Under the new benefits regime, solo mothers must
present themselves as "work ready" as soon as their youngest
child turns seven, or lose their income.   So what happens
to that seven-year-old once school finishes for the day - or
during the school holidays - if the child 's mother can't
afford (or find) child care?  
    The new regime, it seems, may not be as draconian as
it sounds.   Shipley:   "The work test does not
require parents to be away from their children if they can
show the cost benefits of their earnings cannot cover that
risk."       No one,   she promises, will have
their benefits cut off when their child turns seven.
  People will be asked to look to the marketplace for their
future.       "The benefit will be there until you
take that step."       On paper, this looks like
business as usual: solo mothers already move quickly off the
DPB and - despite the hostility directed at solo mothers - the
DPB costs only three percent of social welfare spending and
accounts for only 4.6 percent of welfare fraud and abuse.  
    Similarly, Shipley has soothing words about the new
"stand down" provisions.   The bare outline indicates that
if someone leaves their job voluntarily or is dismissed, they
lose the dole for six months.   If, in other words, a young
worker is being sexually pressured by her employer, does she
have to wait to be attacked in order to prove her case - since
by leaving, she will have no income at all?  
    Apparently not.   Shipley has already instructed her
departmental staff that if there is any doubt why someone
left, they are to err on the side of the client, not the
employer.   In line with that, she has also had drafted an
instruction that it will not be necessary for charges of
sexual harassment to be filed against an employer before that
is taken as   "good and sufficient"   reason for
leaving a job.   There is no way   in hell,   Shipley
insists - striking a rather unlikely pose as champion of
  workers'   rights - that the stand down rules will be
allowed to give employers the chance to victimise their
staff.  
      T  HESE GLIMMERS of a more humane
approach are, however, rather token.   Shipley insists that
where real need exists, supplementary benefits will be made
available.   In taking that $1 billion from beneficiaries,
however, the government has put aside only some $25 million
for extra assistance.   Those first through the door and the
most articulate should mop that up fairly quickly.  
      Targeting the needy ignores a basic point: our
recent history of targeting benefits shows that relatively few
who qualify take them up.   This is mainly because the needy
simply never know the extra assistance exists&semi; others find
that the experience of applying for the main benefits (the
dole, the DPB) is so humiliating they do not go back to beg
for more.   The take-up rates for Guaranteed Minimum Family
Assistance, for instance, are reportedly below 50 percent.  
    Besides those who fall through the cracks, there is
the social resentment by the low paid.   There is evidence
that those in the community who resent beneficiaries reserve
their deepest hostility for the special needs grants and
supplementary assistance.   The benefit cuts, therefore,
will not only lock more of the needy in the poverty prison&semi;
they will increase the stigma for those who then have to beg
for help, and target social resentment against the
beggars.  
    The mood is one of belt tightening and hardship ahead.
  Bolger, in his Te Kuiti state of the nation speech last
month, lamented how few New Zealanders were ready to make the
sacrifices that were ahead.  
    There are, of course, overseas precedents for how the
sacrifices can be shared.   During the second oil shock the
prime minister of Japan was among those who took a 10 percent
wage cut.   Jenny Shipley 's   net   income per week is
over $1700 - at a time when she has cut the DPB plus family
support level for a solo parent with one child by $27, to
$227.   To match the sacrifices she is asking of others, how
does Shipley intend to change her personal lifestyle, so that
she can lead by example?  
    Shipley:   "Well, you 'll be aware that cabinet
did not take the pay increase this year.   That was a
forgoing of over $4000 per cabinet member.   Now I
understand that people on benefits could well be cynical about
that amount, considering the fact that the salary appears to
be very large.   But I think that you will find that in both
time and money, members of Parliament are nowhere near as well
off as they are perceived.   But quite frankly, that and
this issue [of benefit cuts] is   quite  
separate."        
  

    Fast Food for Fast Times    
    What lies behind the smiling face of Ronald
McDonald?   LINDSAY DAVIS examines the issues surrounding
McDonald 's, the world 's largest fast food
enterprise.    
    Ray Kroc, aged 52, kitchen paraphernalia supersalesman
from Chicago, wonders why Mac and Richard McDonald buy so much
equipment from his company.   Flies down to San Bernadino,
California.   A deal is struck and cash tills ring - a
meagre US$2.7 million.   Suddenly the same looking junk-food
parlours start dotting their course across the U.S.  
    But water is no boundary for these evangelists.
  Their desire to make new converts is stronger than any
makeup Tammy Baker could market.   Today the 'Golden Arches'
tentacles spread through 52 different countries.   From
Moscow (a recent convert) through Europe, Africa, Asia, the
Americas and the Pacific.   Every 17 hours a new McDonald 's
opens somewhere in the world, using up to 500 million pounds
of beef each day to feed its customers.   All of which
translates into yearly sales of over US$17 billion.
  (1)    (1)  reference      
    McDonald 's growth is all part of the
    corporations    corporation 's     tactical
manoeuvering along with its military style chain of command,
extensive public relations, million dollar advertising budget,
and cheap labour.   A labour pool that is uniformly dressed
and armed with rule books that talk about   "crew
members"   (employees) that   "man
stations"   (counters).   It 's all like a futuristic
giant cholesterol battleship whose mission is to smile and
sell before they 'kill'.  
    It 's classic stuff.   It reads like a Springsteen
song&semi; all the way along preaching about the American dream.
  Recently the     dreams    dream 's     edges
have become very cloudy, forcing the schizoid corporate giant
to slowly emerge     form    from     an
increasingly unsatisfying sleep.  
    RAINFORESTS    
    The hamburger is heavily implicated in the destruction
of forests throughout the world.   As United States demand
for meat grew, Western meat-buying firms began investing in
developing nations.   From the woodlands of Africa to the
rainforests of Central America the toll has been a recurring
pattern of deforestation, ruined soil, starving local
populations and an enriched small elite.  
    The destruction of rainforests in the Amazon Basin is
even more dramatic where bulldozing, burning and chemical
defoliation destroy immense tracts of forest each year.
  (2)    (2)  reference      
    In 1989 the crew of the spaceship   Discovery  
photographed a smoke cloud over the Amazon rainforest of a
million square miles.   Over Europe it would stretch from
London to Moscow.   In 1988 forest burning in the Amazon
region was responsible for roughly 20% of greenhouse gases
released.
  (3)    (3)  reference      
    Tropical forests are now disappearing worldwide at a
rate of 142,000 square kilometres a year through commercial
logging, cattle ranching and conversion to agriculture.   A
further 200,000 square kilometres are also seriously degraded
each year.   Teresa Apin adds:   "The result is not
only that forest people are dispossessed.   Plants and
animals are made extinct, floods and droughts follow, soil
erosion becomes widespread and the associated industries add
to global warming"  .
  (4)    (4)  reference      
    Within Central America two-thirds of its lowland and
lower montane rainforest has been cleared since 1950, at a
rate which continues at about 20,000 square kilometres a year.
  Ironically, out of 40 of the
    worlds    world 's     poorest countries 36
export food to the United States.
    (5)    (5)  reference      
  the footnote reference isn't actually there    
    McDonald 's, the largest fast food enterprise and the
largest buyer of beef in the world, denies, and always has
denied, that it has been involved with rainforest destruction
- aware not only of the environment lobby but also of U.S.
ranching and feedlot interests.  
    Burger King, the third largest chain in the global
junk-food business admitted that it had been buying 70% of
Costa Rica 's beef exports up until September 1987 when falling
sales and continuing demonstrations forced it to stop this
practice.
  (6)    (6)  reference      
    The tragedy is that Costa Rica is completely unsuited
for cattle farming.   The land on which cattle grazed had to
be created by clearing vast areas of forest.   Between
50,000 and 70,000 hectares of forest are destroyed annually to
provide short term pasture.   As a result one-third of the
    count    country     is now covered with
pasture or infertile scrub.
  (7)    (7)  reference      
    McDonald 's claims are very hard to substantiate or
disprove as in the U.S. meat is not marked as imported once it
has passed health checks at U.S. borders.
  (8)    (8)  reference    
  Furthermore, meat imported into the U.S. from Central
America is categorised, after it leaves its point of entry, as
domestic beef.   For wholesale and marketing purposes it is
just "beef".   So when McDonald 's spokesman state that the
company only uses 'indigenous' beef
  box  
they are speaking the truth as they see it, without
recognising that the beef could possibly originate from
outside the U.S.
  (9)    (9)  reference      
    There are, and always have been, a substantial amount
of reports refuting McDonald 's claims.  
    Dr Norman Myers, a senior Associate of the World
Wildlife Fund in the U.S. and Environmental consultant under
the U.S. National Academy of Science (amongst others), stated
that during his visits to Costa Rica in late 1976 and early
and mid-1979 he heard   "on more than one occasion,
during discussions with the Grupo Ganadero Industria de Costa
Rica (a rancher 's organisation), that Costa Rican beef does
indeed find its way into McDonald 's hamburgers.     In
addition, a production engineer of the Guatemalan beef packing
plant Industria de Ganaderos Guatemalicos, and a supplier to
McDonald 's, stated in late 1979 that he was purchasing beef
directly     form    from     the Guatemalan beef
packing plant in question  "  .
  (10)    (10)  reference      
    A great deal of further investigating was done and
McDonald 's eventually received a letter from the Duke of
Edinburgh acknowledging that Dr Myers and the World Wildlife
Fund were satisfied that McDonald 's were exonerated from any
implication in the destruction of Rainforests.  
    Jeremy Hill and Hilary Scannell in a Third World First
publication state:   "In Haiti companies own land in the
fertile valleys while the peasants have tiny subsistence farms
on barren mountain slopes.     Among the produce of the
valleys is alfalfa - to be feed to cattle owned by
McDonald 's    "    .
  (11)    (11)  reference      
    Over the years McDonald 's has become so defensive
about being associated with Rainforest destruction that they
have issued a Corporate Policy Statement.   It is a rather
bulky document that includes several retractions by well known
people including the ex-pop singer Sting and even TV3 's
  Nightline   presenter Belinda Todd.   Todd 's on-air
apology     occured    occurred     on April 24,
1990 after her previous     nights    night 's    
comments 'implied' that by not eating at McDonald 's, Brazilian
Rainforests would be saved.  
    One retraction that will never be included is by Otago
University 's Student Newspaper editor Emma Reid.   Emma
recently received a flurry of legalese from an Auckland lawyer
on behalf of McDonald 's.   According to the lawyer,
  Critic 's   editorial (April 3, 1990) had overstepped
that fine line that so many journalists walk when talking
about McDonald 's and environmental issues.  
    Emma 's retraction was done in fine style with a
cartoon cover titled "The Amazon Rain Forest".   Only one
tree remained in a valley of tree stumps.   The animals are
pitifully hanging off its branches whilst a clown - not too
dissimilar to Ronald - is gleefully hacking away at its base
with an axe.  
    The same Auckland lawyer put pen to paper and came up
with this gem:   "...we observe that the resemblance to
Ronald McDonald is by no means total, but we are accordingly
disposed to think that the retraction compiled with the
cartoon indicates something less than a wholehearted desire to
retract and apologise"  .   Luckily for
  Critic 's   finances the letter ended with a "warning".
  Strike one for the people!   Whatever the truth of the
various allegations about McDonald 's directly using rainforest
beef, two things are clear.   By its sheer popularisation
and promotion of the hamburger as a symbol of the global
supermarket and international consumerism, McDonald 's acts to
create a world market.   A market other companies will
inevitably tap by exploiting rainforest beef.  
    Secondly, that the West 's apparent insatiable desire
for cheap meat (whether for burgers, pet food or processed
meat
  cartoon  
products), exerts enormous market pressures on beef producers
to exploit the cheapest and most available land - often
tropical forest.
  (12)    (12)  reference      
  box  
    OZONE DAMAGE    
    Leaving the issue of beef aside, environmentalists
have also long been questioning McDonald 's use of paper and
plastics that go into its throw-away packaging.   In 1972 it
was estimated that it took 315 square miles of forest per year
to keep the company supplied in paper.
  (13)    (13)  reference      
    This figure does not take into account the damage
caused to the ozone layer by plastic foam packaging
manufactured using
    chloroflurocarbons    chlorofluorocarbons    
(CFCs).  
    In a desperate attempt to stem criticism McDonald 's
headquarters boldly announced, on August 5 1987, that because
there were   "reasonable alternatives to possibly
harmful CFCs"   it would begin   "a prompt phase
out"  .   The change took 16 months to complete in the
U.S.   World outlets would then follow the U.S. example.
  (14)    (14)  reference      
    This did not mean that McDonald 's and other companies
were banning plastic foams but merely looking for an
alternative.   The way they found to circumvent restrictions
on CFC usage was accomplished by changing the name of one CFC,
with the help of the U.S. Government.   McDonald 's could now
continue to use it without incurring the public 's wrath about
ozone depletion.   Instead of calling this chemical CFC-22
as the industry had for half   a   century it was renamed
"HCFC-22".
    (15)    (15)  reference      
    Despite this distinction CFC-22 and HCFC-22 are the
same chemical&semi; a green house gas and an ozone destroyer.
  But HCFC-22 is not listed in the Montreal Protocol roster
of ozone depleting chemicals to be controlled.
  (16)    (16)  reference    
  Environmentalists realise this and are working to gain its
inclusion as a  'recognised' ozone depleter.  
    However to Aotearoa 's credit we are the only country
in the McDonald 's 's  first ' originally single quote
mark   empire to use paperboard packaging for burger
cartons.   In all other countries McDonald 's uses foam
packaging.   However outside of Aotearoa McDonald 's jargon
about packaging changes has not slowed down the worldwide
protest trend that they seem to attract wherever their
tentacles spread.   On July 11, 1990   The Press  
reported an incident outside the company 's soon to be opened
Bondi Beach branch.   Environmentalists were protesting the
company 's "polystyrene packaging" and want them to
  "revert to recycled cardboard"  .   All of
which makes perfect ecological sense.
  (17)    (17)  reference      
    Two weeks later   The Press   carried an article
about an East German politician calling for a ban on
McDonald 's being allowed to cross the Berlin Wall.
  McDonald 's had planned to open 10 outlets in East Germany
by 1991.   But, Ernst Doerfler, chairman of East Germany 's
environmental committee, said banning takeaway restaurants
which use disposable plastic plates and cutlery was the only
way to avoid     capitalisms    capitalism 's    
worst environmental mistakes.
  (18)    (18)  reference      
    If Ernst Doerfler defeats the McDonald 's onslaught
then East Germany will join Morocco, who has also banned major
hamburger chains from setting up.   Indonesia, taking a
slightly different angle, has prohibited all fast food
companies from advertising on television.
  (19)    (19)  reference      
    Ironically, while fast food corporations are some of
the worst contributors to global litter and waste they are
also very keen to be seen as "green".   Corporate giants are
boosting the coffers of environmental groups in return for
influence and a greener image.   The Sierra Club, after
considerable agonising, recently turned down $700,000 from
McDonald 's, who wanted to sponsor an environmental education
project.   The Audubon society, another environmental fund,
were made a similar offer but also refused.
  (20)    (20)  reference    
  In the trade this is known as a "Green Wash".  
    However, to dismiss all McDonald 's protesters as
"greenies" is to do these people a grave misjustice.   For
many people McDonald 's is
    synonomous    synonymous     with 'Union
busting' and youth exploitation primarily.   Environmental
concerns and the issue of 'cultural imperialism', while very
important, are nevertheless a secondary issue.  
    CHEAP LABOUR    
    The backbone of McDonald 's has always been cheap
labour.   This was clearly shown by Kroc 's own actions in
1972 when he backed Richard Nixon 's Presidential campaign to
the tune of $200,000.   Soon after the election Nixon backed
a Bill calling for a   "below minimum wage"  
which would allow employers to hire 16 and 17 year old 's, as
well as full-time students, at 80% of the minimum wage.
  For companies like McDonald 's this 'proposal' would save
them millions.   While the Bill was thrown out by the
Senate, Nixon 's veto made sure it was passed into law.
  (21)    (21)  reference      
    The company 's practice of only hiring young part-time
workers is well known.   Christchurch Hotel Workers Union
organiser, Diane O'Keefe believes that   "the worst
people affected are school leavers who don't know their rights
and are basically too scared to stand up for them when
anything happens"  .  
  box  
    Today McDonald 's is the U.S. largest corporate
employer of youth with more than half of its 500,000 employees
under 20.   One out of every 15 Americans works at
McDonald 's as their first job.
  (22)    (22)  reference    
  In Britain 75% of the
    companys    company 's     workers are under
21.   In Australia workers have complained about being
sacked when they turned 20.   This practice allows the
company to avoid paying adult wages to employees.  
      In Australia and Britain part-time workers often
work long hours without the company having to pay out
sickness,holiday or other benefits.
  (23)    (23)  reference    
  McDonald 's high turnover of workers clearly reflects their
working conditions.  
    Combined with the company 's policy of employing young
part-time workers is a strong anti-union stance.   Hotel
Workers Union official Ken Howell says McDonald 's has a
worldwide policy of trying to keep Unions off its premises.
  (24)    (24)  reference    
  Only workers in Aotearoa and the USSR are protected by
compulsory unions.   However McDonald 's philosophy in these
countries remains the same.  
    The most outrageous action take by McDonald 's
management as part of 'union busting' occurred in San
Francisco where employees were forced to submit to lie
detector tests - if they refused they were dismissed.
  Those who took them were asked if they had any Union
sympathies, and whether they had ever stolen or given away any
hamburgers.   This practice was eventually stopped by law
after public outcry.
  (25)    (25)  reference      
  box  
    Last year NZ award talks were stalled as McDonald 's
refused to let Union organisers into staffrooms and kitchens.
  Instead, employees had to be interviewed in the public
restaurant.   McDonald 's also would not deduct union fees
unless Union officials personally interviewed each
    McDonald    McDonald 's     employee first.
  Hotel Workers organiser Joan Godfrey believed that the
biggest block to progress had been McDonald 's:   "They
are American owned and well skilled in anti-union
methods"  .   She concluded that while
  "McDonald 's spend megabucks on their adverts and like
to be known as benevolent in the community ... they 're making
heaps of profits and they are happy to exploit women
workers"  .
  (26)    (26)  reference      
    Managing Director of McDonald 's New Zealand, Mr Gary
Lloydd, believed that Union officials were standing in the way
of job opportunities during negotiations.   Mr Lloydd was
trying to reduce the minimum hours for shift work from 4 to 2
hours which in turn   "would create 700 extra shifts a
week"   at McDonald 's alone.   This would allow
McDonald 's and its staff increased flexibility.
  (27)    (27)  reference      
    For many, McDonald 's is a perfect example of every
aspect about Adam Smith 's diatribe that is loathsome.   We
are repulsed by the mesmerised stranglehold that McDonald 's
has over the American psyche.   According to corporate
claims two out of every 3 U.S. adults
    eats    eat     at McDonald 's at least once a
month while 96% of U.S. school-children ranked Ronald McDonald
- that colourful, fun loving cretinous clown - second only to
Santa Claus.
  (28)    (28)  reference    
  What the ads do not tell you is that fast food is as low
on nutrition as it is high on unhealthy fats and
additives.  
    Ironically McDonald 's combines its hardnosed sense of
business with a contradictory stance in that the corporation
is obsessed by public relations and this is where the dream 's
bubble is being burst.   Just as a young child seeks
constant approval and attention, so does McDonald 's seek to be
seen as doing the right thing.   This is clearly reflected
in the millions of dollars that they deliberately spend in the
local community - be it promoting seatbelt safety or cot death
research.   We might term this 'conscience money'.  
    The question is whether their concern with public
opinion inspires real changes in their operations or merely
more elaborate public relations.   For example, at present
McDonald 's is organising a trial recycling project due to be
tested in Auckland stores later this year.   By September
many items of packaging material as well as office stationery
will be printed on 100% recycled paper.   Combine these
gains with the fact that employees, who used to aim to serve
up orders in a minute, will soon     by    be    
joining their American counter-parts in racing the clock to
beat 30 seconds.  
    While this obsession with speed may be a necessity in
the U.S. it is certainly not a part of our lives or 'culture'.
  McDonald 's has a basic lack of understanding about the
countries they operate in, outside of the U.S. that is.
  McDonald 's boast that their product is the same throughout
the world, but this clearly fails to take into account
different cultures, needs or tastes.   In South America
beans were asked to be included, in Australia it was beetroot
and tomato.   In both cases national preferences were
arrogantly ignored.   Instead our taste buds have been
bombarded with bland chemically laden food.   Yet another
example of homogenised American culture being thrust down our
throats.   It 's like my friend Donald said to me:
  "Stick a fork in their ass and turn them over, they 're
done"  .      
  

        HANG   'EM   HIGH?    
  illustration  
    New Zealanders no longer hang those who kill
others.   But in the 1950s capital punishment was still on
the law books and eight men were executed.   Some of their
deaths were appallingly bungled and the lives of those who
hanged them were forever tainted by the experience.   Should
the death sentence ever again be legal in our
country?  
    by Greg Newbold  
      O  N THE FIRST day of July 1987, 2000
placard-carrying men, women and children marched to Aotea
Square in Auckland.   Similar rallies took place in
Whangarei, Hamilton, Taumaranui and Napier.   The
occasion of the gatherings was the funeral of six-year-old
Teresa Cormack, whose defiled and decomposing body had been
found a week before amid the seaweed and driftwood on
Whirinaki Beach.   Her death was not a cause so much as a
catalyst of the July demonstrations, for in the winter of
1987 sentiment about violent and sexual offending was already
high.  
    In March the previous year a Christchurch woman
had been abducted, raped and strangled, before being left for
dead in the boot of a car.   Seven months later, in the same
city, six-year-old Louisa Damodran had been abducted after
school and drowned.   The offenders in both cases had
histories of sexual crime.   In January 1987 a woman had
been subjected to a prolonged rape at a Mongrel Mob
convention in Auckland.   The report of the Committee of
Inquiry into Violence, released in March, had shown that
annual murder and manslaughter convictions had increased
almost fourfold since the late 1960s.   Rape and attempted
rape had grown nearly fivefold.   Serious assaults had leapt
sevenfold.   In December a   New Zealand Herald  -NRB
poll showed that concern over law and order was mounting
faster than any other problem in New Zealand.  
    The gathering of the crowds in North Island centres in
July 1987 reflected the mood of the nation.   Violent crime
was out of control.   It was time to get tough with
offenders.     "Hang   'em   high"  ,
  "Show no mercy"  ,   "Bring back capital
punishment"   the placards blared.   In Auckland
the mob chanted and cheered as workmen on a nearby
building site hanged a human effigy.   Below, in front of
television cameras, an hysterical woman screamed,
  "Hang them! Hang them!"   into attentive
microphones.  
    To those with longer memories, the Aotea Square scenes
were nothing new.   They had been rehearsed often before,
not only in New Zealand but also in Britain and the US.
  Britain suspended executions in 1965 and abolished them in
1969.   IRA bombings have led to vocal but vain calls for
reintroduction.   In the US, which had begun a decade-long
moratorium on executions in 1967, clamour for resumption
continued until January 1977, when Gary Gilmore faced a
firing squad in Utah.   Since then more than 100 killers
have been shot, gassed, hanged, electrocuted or dispatched by
lethal injection&semi; 2200 more await their fate on death row.
  Murder statistics continue to soar, with over 20,000
criminal homicides recorded in the US every year.   But in
the Land of the Free, support for capital punishment is
unabated.  
      L  IKE the US, New Zealand is one of
the few nations in the world to have withdrawn, then recalled,
capital punishment.   Initially installed here in 1840
according to British colonial law, execution for murder
was suspended in 1935, repealed in 1941, brought back in 1950,
suspended again in 1957 and finally, in 1961, done away with
for good.    
    During the 102 years that this country practised
hanging, 43 men and one woman were executed.   Support for
the scaffold has waxed and waned but, as the events of July
1987 indicated, it has never gone completely.   Although
wide support (and political following) can be gained by
apologists for capital punishment, few people today
remember very much about it.   The issue is far more
complicated than simply whether or not killers should swing.
  A close look at the lesson of the 1950s, when hanging was
returned experimentally for seven years, reveals aspects of
the practice which give considerable food for thought.  
    The suspension of capital punishment in 1935 was not
popular.   It had occurred as part of the
liberal/humanitarian philosophies of the incoming Labour
Government, and it was to be six years before the penalty
was actually legislated away.   This change attracted little
notice at the time but, as World War II drew to a close and
attention moved away from the battle zones, dissatisfaction
grew.   To begin with, reported murders increased
dramatically, from five in 1942 to 10 in 1943.   In 1944
there were 20, and another 20 in 1945.   Such sharp
jumps were unprecedented in 20th-century New Zealand and,
coming on the heels of abolition, seemed clear evidence that
the soft approach was failing.   From 1941 every brutal
murder was blamed by death-penalty lobbyists on the absence of
the gallows.  
    The first major outcry came in August 1942 with the
slaying of two elderly sisters and was redoubled in 1946, 1947
and 1948, after a series of four grisly murders which remain
unsolved to this day.   Following the war reported murders
gained even richer press coverage, added to in August 1948
when a young sex offender on parole sexually maimed and
murdered a middle-aged woman out for a Sunday walk.   No
sooner had this sensation faded away than a man hacked his
child and two women to death in a psychopathic frenzy.   At
the trial he displayed no remorse, and his words before the
incident,   "Even if you do murder these days you only
get eight years&semi; that 's because of the good government we 've
got,"   drew wide notice.   Convicting him in April
1949, the jury added a rider calling for the restoration of
the death penalty.  
    The murders and murder trials of 1948 and 1949 ensured
that the issue of hanging had no chance to cool in the vital
months preceding the election of November 1949.   The
National Party pledged that, if elected, it would bring back
the death penalty.   After a decisive victory, it wasted no
time fulfilling its promise&semi; within 12 months capital
punishment was back on the books.  
    In February 1951, only 11 weeks after hanging had been
reinstated, Gordon McSherry was condemned for killing a bank
clerk during a robbery.   He was speedily reprieved, but the
outcry which followed was a warning that vacillation would not
be tolerated.   There had been eight convictions for murder
in 1950, at the time the highest annual figure on record.
  If that trend continued, the sentence would soon be
confirmed.  
    Between 1951 and 1957 the sentence of death was passed
22 times for murder in New Zealand, and was carried out eight
times.   All the hangings took place at Mt Eden prison.  
    After McSherry 's reprieve the next person convicted of
murder was William Fiori, condemned for slaying his
employer and his employer 's wife, for money.   Described
officially as   "border  -  line
feeble-minded"  , Fiori had lodged no appeal against
conviction, although a recommendation for clemency had been
made by the trial jury.   Having received the prisoner
following his sentencing, the Mt Eden authorities anxiously
awaited the verdict of the Executive Council.  
    From the time of the conviction Horace Haywood, the
prison superintendent, maintained close contact with
Fiori.   The trial had been conducted in Hamilton and
Haywood himself was a member of the escort which had
transferred the prisoner to Auckland.   Fiori had been
condemned on February 14 and it was almost three weeks before
Cabinet decided that there were no grounds for clemency.
  Haywood relayed the news to   caption    photo  
the capital cell.   Seven days later, on the evening of
Thursday, March 13, 1952, the hanging party, led by Haywood,
escorted its trembling victim to the prison basement.   The
hood was fitted and the noose secured.   The signal was
given, the trap sprung, and a split second later Fiori 's body
swung twitching at the end of the rope.  
    After Fiori, the second man to drop was Eruera Te
Rongopatahi who, after a dispute with his girlfriend, had gone
out and shot a taxi-driver.   Te Rongopatahi died in
September 1953 and a little over three months later, two weeks
before Christmas, Harry "Darkie" Whiteland, an Indian railway
worker, was executed for shooting a fellow employee after an
argument.   For 18 months no more hangings took place,
but in the five months between July and December 1955 there
were four.  
    On July 7 English immigrant Frederick Foster was
executed for shooting a former lover, and Edward Te Whiu was
hung on August 13.   Te Whiu, a simple boy of 20, had
strangled an old woman during a robbery.   On October 13,
Eric Allwood died for shooting his drinking partner and on
December 5 Albert Black was executed.   An Irish migrant,
Black had stabbed another man after quarrelling over a
woman.   Like Whiteland, two years before, he wished
observers a Merry Christmas.  
    The eighth and last execution was James Bolton, who
died 15 months after Black.   Bolton 's case was unusual&semi; he
differed markedly from the young nondescripts who had gone
before him.   Bolton was 68 years old, a successful farm
manager, convicted of poisoning his wife.   He vigorously
protested his innocence to the end and there is still
doubt about his guilt (see   Listener  , April 22,
1989).   On February 18, 1957, the day he was scheduled to
die (though he was unaware of it at the time), Bolton
requested an interview with the superintendent and
made an impassioned plea for his life.   But the hour of
execution had been set and, in order to avoid
embarrassment, Bolton was brought to the gallows so
heavily sedated (yet still distraught) that he virtually
had to be dragged by prison staff.  
  illustration  
      I  N SPITE OF their supposed deterrent
function, judicial executions in this country were veiled
in secrecy and the Government took care to allow as little
publicity about them as possible.   But inevitably they were
public events.   Apart from official personnel, a limited
number of spectators was allowed.   Any justice of the peace
was permitted to attend, as were representatives of the
police.   News delegates, too, were invited along, provided
they exercised "restraint" in their published accounts.
  Condemned men were allowed to receive religious
instruction from a minister of their choice, and to request
that he attend their hanging.  
    The effects of executions on witnesses were various.
  In his book   While We Have Prisons  , former prison
psychologist Don MacKenzie remembers a justice of the peace
who made a point of attending every hanging.   He was, he
said, studying their   "psychological effects"  .
  Most spectators were less intrigued.   A
  Truth   newspaper representative who attended Black 's
execution was clearly repelled by what he saw, as were members
of the clergy.   Some churchmen had to be pressured by
their seniors into doing their share of an onerous duty.
  Father A H Hyde, parish priest of St Benedict 's Catholic
Church, attended two executions - those of Te Rongopatahi
and Black - and he described the first as the most unnerving
experience of his life.   The morning after, he said, he was
so drained that he could not stand up straight when he got out
of bed.   It took him a week or two to get over the
emotional impact.   Knowing the strain they could have,
therefore, Hyde insisted that padres should never attend
hangings alone.  
    Among the worst affected were the sheriffs.   They
were the official directors of proceedings, whose job it was
formally to command the superintendent to
  "surrender the body of the prisoner"   and
then signal the hangman to pull the trap lever.   MacKenzie
reports that during the 1951-57 period, three different
sheriffs officiated, and each was seriously affected.
  One suffered a physical collapse at an execution and had
to be held up by two prison officers while he performed his
sombre duty.   Another so dreaded executions that he
began turning up to them drunk.   Each of these men went
sick - for periods of up to four months - after an execution,
suffering symptoms such as shock, anxiety, nervous exhaustion
and duodenal haemorrhaging.  
    Officers I have spoken to feel that opinion among
prison staff on capital punishment was divided about 50-50,
but tended more towards abolition as the
  box    caption    photo   number of executions
mounted.   Personnel chosen for hanging duty were
replaced if they showed any signs of nervousness and only
the most stoic and reliable were considered.   The job was
not for the faint of heart.   When Frederick Foster refused
to raise his chin for the noose, MacKenzie reports, one of the
party later boasted of having stuck his fingers into the
terrified man 's eyes to force his head back.   Some openly
defended the penalty.   Others remained non-committal.
  Many of the older officers had seen active service during
the war and their experiences had inured them to suffering.
    "There was nothing personal in it,"   one
said to me.       "We were only carrying out the
sentence of the court."      
    But the officers in the hanging party were protected
to some degree from emotional involvement because they had no
contact with a prisoner before his time.   The men on "death
watch", who monitored the prisoner 24 hours a day, were in a
different situation.   For them empathy with the condemned
was inevitable.   It was their good fortune never to be
required to join the hanging party because, by the time the
execution took place, they had grown to know the victim well.
  They tended to oppose the penalty more strongly.  
  illustration  
      T  HE PERSON most affected was the
prison superintendent, Horace Haywood.   His contact
with the condemned was both intimate and unavoidable.   To
him fell the task of seeing to the health and welfare of
capital cases and of ensuring, if the sentence was confirmed,
that it was carried out smoothly.  
    His job was the most stressful of all, since the whole
burden of the ritual fell on him.   The superintendent was
in close contact with a capital man and his family from the
time he was sentenced to the time his corpse was taken from
the institution, the day after his death.   For him there
was no escape from the pain, the anguish and the suffering of
a condemned man and his family.   When a reprieve was
granted, Haywood quickly relayed the news to the death cell.
  When one was denied, it was his job to inform the prisoner
that he would face the gallows within seven days.   On the
evening of an execution he had to have the prisoner
prepared for death.   The transfer of the condemned to
the basement, the pinioning of his limbs, the fitting of the
hood, the positioning of the noose, tightly, around the
victim 's neck - all these crucial tasks were the
superintendent 's ultimate concern.   If anything went
wrong, he would have to answer for it, and it was his
conscience that would be plagued.  
    Such a solemn duty, such an horrific responsibility,
weighed cruelly on Haywood 's mind.   On 22 occasions, he
had to receive and care for people condemned to death by the
courts, without knowing whether or not the sentence would be
carried out.   On eight occasions over a seven-year period,
Haywood was forced to accompany men on their final walk.  
    The effect of all this on the superintendent was
marked.   Every execution took its toll, some more than
others, but with each hanging the accumulated
  photos    captions   impact grew.   Haywood
started to drink, and as time went by his ability to cope got
worse.   He began taking alcohol before executions, and also
tended increasingly to blot out his feelings afterwards.
  Haywood 's boozing was noticed by both staff and
inmates and became a topic of comment around the jail.
  After officiating at an execution in Fiji, Haywood was off
work for some weeks.   It was rumoured that he was lying in
bed blind drunk, throwing empty whisky bottles at the wall.
  One inmate is said to have personally accused Haywood
of drowning his emotions in grog whenever a hanging was due.
  Another was put on charge for saying to an officer,
  "Yeah, Haywood would still be sucking on his whisky
bottle after telling the bloke to pull the lever."    
      Haywood 's rapid deterioration soon showed in other
aspects of his life.   He became increasingly paranoid,
festooning his home with locks.   He began carrying a loaded
pistol around with him.   He grew grey and tired looking,
and started falling asleep at work.   Towards the end of the
1950s it was clear that a man whose ability and initiative had
driven him rapidly through the junior ranks in the late 1940s
was having difficulty coping with his job.   Finally, in
1963, he was removed from his post.   Ten months later, he
died, a shattered man.   It would be wrong to blame the
executions totally for Haywood 's downfall, but they were a
significant part of it.  
    In 1957 National was ousted and the new Labour
Government suspended executions again.   A single voting
majority in the House made Labour hesitant to legislate,
and it was not until after 1960, when National got back into
power, that anything was done.   In 1961 Ralph Hanan, the
new Minister of Justice, and the only National member to have
voted against capital punishment in 1950, introduced a law
which again removed capital punishment for murder.  
  illustration  
      F  EW ISSUES in modern penology have
been discussed so hotly, so often and at such length as
capital punishment.   The major problem is that, as with
religion, people 's convictions about the subject are more
often emotional than logical and not, therefore, always
responsive to argument.   Where New Zealand is concerned,
the experience of the 50s provides some useful
perspectives on the enigmatic question of judicial
killings.  
    As in the US, homicide rates in New Zealand have shown
no relation to the presence or absence of the death penalty
and there is serious doubt among criminologists that the
majority of murders can be affected by it.   Mortal threat
is no great deterrent to many forms of human behaviour.
  Racing drivers, mountain climbers, drug addicts and
cigarette smokers all pursue their fancies despite the risks
involved.   In wartime people volunteer to fight en masse,
knowing that the chances of being killed are considerable.
  The true impetus behind arguments to retain the death
penalty is not a reduction of the murder rate but a burning
desire for vengeance.   The mood at the end of the 40s and
the events at Aotea Square in 1987 are both clear examples of
this.  
    One of the most powerful arguments against capital
punishment concerns the possibility of error.   The
guilt of Bolton is still questioned today.   The altered
verdict in the Australian Chamberlain case, the Guildford Four
in Britain, our own Arthur Thomas and later Dean Wickliffe,
are further chilling reminders of the fallibility of British
justice.   The judges and juries who determine another
human 's fate are not omniscient authorities but merely
flesh and blood.  
    But, even when they are conducted according to the
best principles of sovereign law, executions degrade not
only the legal system but the people associated with it.
  In the 1950s, padres were devastated, sheriffs crumbled.
  The hangmen were often nervous and unsure of what they
were supposed to be doing.   On one occasion the noose was
wrongly fitted.   On another the lever was almost pulled too
early.   Sometimes the victim 's neck didn't break.
  (Presumably this was fairly common in the 19th century,
until the position of the knot was changed in 1891.)   In
1934 it is recorded that William Bayly died from asphyxiation&semi;
his pulse was still strong four minutes after the drop, so a
prison officer had to be dispatched to the pit to swing on his
legs.   There were problems with Bolton in 1958.   Unable
to support himself on his feet, it is rumoured that he fell
tied to a chair.   He, too, died of strangulation.  
    The lesson of the 1950s is that capital punishment in
New Zealand was a sorry failure.   If it was ever
reintroduced, the problems which plagued it before would
undoubtedly return.   Hanging murderers did not alter the
rate of homicide.   The practice was not always carried out
humanely&semi; at times it was a bungled disgrace.   It did not
even satisfy the public for long, and so it failed in its
symbolic purpose.   What the gallows did achieve was the
deaths of eight working men trapped by vicious circumstance.
  Their misfortune disturbed only a few and their pain
expiated many sins.   But nothing the scaffold did could
ever compensate for the tainted lives of those who worked
beneath its shadow.      
  

      speculations    
      an end to barbarism?    
      Could the
    90s      '90s       be the decade in which
we rediscover the worth of civilised behaviour and find we now
have the courage and convictions to defend it?   Surely the
barbarians have had it too good for too long.    
    WHILE THE     90s      '90s      
don't actually begin until next year, it seems churlish to
wait until then to pontificate on what to expect during the
"next decade" when 1990 happens to be our own year of
assessment, celebration and introspection.   Also, I must
admit to a perception that there is something new in the
air.  
    When I first began to make plans to attend Kiri 's
Homecoming, I looked forward to an opportunity to combine a
summer 's evening picnic with some fine music in the company of
good friends.   I found myself in the middle of an Auckland
Woodstock&semi; a Woodstock in that it was a huge gathering,
drawn by a musical event, and which transcended itself to
embody a unifying mood which I suspect will dominate
New Zealand during the next decade.  
    Furthermore, the majority of Kiri 's audience was of
the Woodstock generation, "doing its thing" again.   Older,
more affluent, and maybe less flamboyant, but still able to
demonstrate that the baby-boom generation continues to
call the lifestyle shots as it bulges its way through the
demographic marketplace.  
    I was living in America during the original Woodstock
festival, studying Planning and Public Policy at the
University of California in Berkeley.   In those
counter-culture times, one of the notions under attack was the
culture of the ruling elite.   Elitist tastes were to be
enjoyed only in the privacy of one 's home - and to be quickly
abandoned if neighbours called.   We wore jeans and beads,
sat cross-legged or lounged on bean bags and didn't trust
anyone over 30.  
    Rock and folk music was in.   Street theatre and
street music was in.   Opera, chamber music and
"legitimate" theatre was out.   Film actors learned to
mumble - good diction was elitist.   Executives hung their
children 's daubs as paintings in their office.   Student
radicals demanded "relevant education" - stimulated by our own
Ashton-  Warner 's   Teacher  .   There was even
a movement to teach ghetto-jive in black schools as a
legitimate dialect because it was unfair to require black
children to learn middle class (hence elitist) English.
  (Black leaders were smart enough to reject this liberal
fantasy - they may well have read
  Pygmalion  .)  
    Anti-elitism was a coherent movement and naturally
spread to New Zealand.  
    The cause had its merits.   Catch phrases such as
"Power to the People" promoted the democratic ideal and
truly encouraged those in power to give credence to community
views which did not necessarily coincide with their own.
  This side of the cause led to such reforms as the
introduction of ward systems into New Zealand local body
elections and one cannot argue against that.   At least I
can't, because I was part of it.  
    But in promoting the worthiness of the different
cultures of "the people", the movement began to foster the
rejection of high-quality art in favour of the elevation of
naive craft or even downright rubbish.   While this trend
was driven by a legitimate desire to give greater credence to
the heritage and customs of minorities, ethnic groups and the
poor, it was accompanied by the surely misguided view that
such elevation necessitated a down  -  grading of the
dominant culture of the West.  
    Any economist could have assured us that artistic
works and other expressions of a culture are not bound by
what they call "the zero-sum rule".   To recognise and
appreciate greater worth in Maori or Aboriginal art, there is
no need to devalue any other.   The total value of our
humanity is simply increased - as Te Maori surely proved.  
    But if this argument is clearly wrong, why did it take
such hold and why did those of us born to elitist ideals cave
in and accept our guilt?  
    AGAIN THE ECONOMISTS had part of the explanation.
  It was easy to demonstrate that the elite had been
hijacking taxes to support its artistic and cultural tastes.
  Governments subsidised chamber music seats while
teenagers paid full price at rock concerts.   The public
library system collected money from the poor to provide
cheap reading for the middle class.   Even today the poor
pay for their videos while the affluent borrow "free" books.
  Higher "professional" education represents the single
greatest transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich - as
we are reluctantly conceding.  
    Such subsidies of the cultural values of the ruling
class were justified by the altruistic notion that it opened
up these valuable pursuits to the poor who otherwise could not
afford to enjoy them.   The fact that the poor stayed away
in droves was just unfortunate and showed that maybe more
subsidies were needed.  
    When the Aotea Centre was first mooted in Auckland,
there was a huge outcry from those who argued that such
temples to the elite were no longer needed.   The idea of
great art had died - presumably along with God.
  Alternative schemes proposed open-air theatres for
buskers, clowns and mime troupes and arenas for demonstrations
of pottery, weaving, macram&eacute; and carving.
  Thankfully we simply widened the footpaths and changed the
bylaws.   Queen Street is the richer for it.    
        Groovy Grannies    
      We have been called recycled teenagers,
perverted pensioners and groovy grannies.   Looked at from
the stultifying, societal stereotype - the knitting,
babysitting, beshawled and be-slippered "granny" - I
suppose that we are.      
    We are the young women of the war years and
frontrunners of the women 's liberation movement, now not so
much demanding liberation for the over-60s as demonstrating
and exploring it.   We are also the generation of universal
superannuitants with a reasonably adequate income, for some
their first financial independence.  
    Are we, then, the trailblazers for future vigorous,
independent, positive and respected older women?  
    Suddenly ageing has become exciting.   We can choose
what to do with our lives and some of us are choosing
adventure.  
    Last year six Kapiti women, aged 61 to 71, paddled
Canadian canoes 80 kilometres down the Wanganui River.   One
of them went on to ski in Switzerland, two to an Outdoor
Pursuits Centre course in Turangi, two to sea-kayak in the
Sounds, one to walk the Heaphy Track, four to a rock-climbing
and abseiling course.  
    These are not isolated achievements.   All over the
country older women are participating not only in sports
considered "suitable" for their age group but in others
not available to them when they were younger.   Tramping,
swimming, aquarobics, mountaineering, horse riding,
gliding, wherever there is an activity there is a grey-haired
woman taking part.  
    Nor are they adventuring   only   into physical
exploits.   A significant number did not progress much
beyond primary school, some had opportunities for tertiary
education curtailed by the war and later were unable to attend
courses or night classes because of caring for families.  
    Many are hungry for further education&semi; even more are
seeking information.  
    In "Learning Later" (1989) David Battersby asserts
  "a healthy aged brain is as active as a healthy young
brain"  .   While only a few will attempt university
courses many are being attracted to lectures held at
suitable times for older people, stimulated to further reading
and even study.  
    We are discovering latent talents in the arts and new
crafts, stimulating our minds learning bridge, mahjong, chess,
scrabble, computer skills, home and car maintenance.  
    Physical and mental health are a priority.   Not
just hedonistic occupations but deliberate attempts to
maintain supple minds and bodies and learn skills to enrich
the probably less active years ahead.  
  box  
    On the whole these women would not wish to return to
the labour force.   Even had they been in gainful employment
most spent much of their lives in unpaid work and still do as
well as opting for voluntary jobs.   The thousands of hours
they give to this are largely unrecognised, yet are a major
contribution to total wealth.   Among them are also the
adventuring women.  
    Perhaps if this work were to receive financial
recognition the nature of the choice to do it and the caring
itself would change.   There are rewards in the need to be
needed and the opportunity for social intercourse.
  However, better funding of the organisations
themselves could relieve these unpaid workers of the extra
chore of fund raising.  
    As older women are uniting some are showing interest
in community and national issues.   While their efforts are
largely unco-ordinated at present and often only on older age
matters, the way is being opened for a positive use of the
better education, wider experience and larger numbers of
the next generation of retirees.  
    This has been a middle class view - there are still
the elderly poor who are also lonely, ill, ill-educated, whose
lives remain empty just because of increased and enforced
leisure.   We have been looking at that new age of older
people who say, "I don't know how I found the time to go to
work".   Because they are showing the possibilities that
leisure offers, expectations of ageing will change, ageism
will disappear.  
    We are demonstrating that leisure can be just as, if
not more, fulfilling than paid employment - it is largely a
matter of income maintenance.   Leisure is not just time for
filling, it is a   "convenient opportunity"  
(Chambers Dictionary 1974) to live well until we die.  
    In illustrating a whole range of leisure-time options
we are opening up a wider consumer market.   Producers are
lagging here and need to look at the market - for example,
what highly unsuitable swimming costumes we are being offered!
The need for well-placed, convenient facilities must be
filled.   Places that will centralise recreation, learning
and shopping (also a recreation), and more specialised local
transport.   Very many more older women than men do not own
a car.   There must be real recognition of our
contribution through voluntary work, as consumers and viable
contributors.   Because of our insistence on health we
are likely to live longer and more successfully so our skills
must be used when we wish to offer them.   The baby boomers
will come to retirement perhaps more prepared than we were but
it is we, the present retirees, who are breaking new ground
for them.  
    The Wanganui canoeists were accompanied by six
young women in kayaks as camera crew and support team.
  Perhaps our greatest contribution is in the words of one
of them:   "To all you wonderful 60s Up women with whom
I have so enjoyed adventuring, thank you for ... giving me the
inspiration to see my future in the outdoors as
limitless"  .  
      Slashing the censor    
      A   SENSE of foreboding accompanies the
enactment of the Films and Video Recordings Amendment
Bill, a law that effectively dumps chief film censor Arthur
Everard as from December 31.  
    It has as much to do with the undemocratic political
processes that allowed it to happen, as with the nature of
the campaign that resulted in his ousting on charges
that he had become   "desensitised"   and
  "too permissive"  .  
    The action is another frightened, knee-jerk
reaction that connects with those emotional and negative
forces in New Zealand society that would have us become a
first-class country for third-rate people.  
    These forces, which adopt the missionary position of
moral rectitude, which have more affinity with the
blood-letting, fundamentalist leanings of the Old Testament,
regrettably go some way to explain the anger and pain among
many of the young and the old on the streets.  
    Unfortunately there seem to be few people in NZ who
have enlightened attitudes of a kind that can deal with
explicit sexual expression on film and videotape and who
can talk about it objectively.   This helps explain why sex
education remains such a volatile issue, and why such
education is not yet in the forefront of policies of those
progressive forces who would guide it.  
    Everyone should take responsibility for improving
this situation.   A few have taken a lead.   The chief
film censor is among them.  
    I want first to deal with the matter of undemocratic
political processes.   The legislation limiting the term
of the chief film censor to six years (Everard has served
for 5 years, 6 months) was passed under urgency.   It was
rushed through second reading, committee and third reading
stages at a weekend sitting of Parliament.   Weekend
sittings are exceptionally rare events and tend to escape
full media attention.  
      The new law was conceived as a means of
streamlining the administrative requirements for film and
video.   The maximum term for the job of chief film
censor arose from an
  cartoon  
amendment in the committee stages of the bill, a committee
which appeared to be loaded in favour of pressure groups and
the Society for the Promotion of Community Standards.  
    The decision to put a maximum time limit on the
job seems to have been aimed at removing Everard.
  Until the law change, the term of chief film censor was
open-ended.   As a demonstrably apolitical position, it
was not determined by legislation.   Everard 's
predecessor, Bernie Tunnecliff, worked for more than 20
years as a film censor, first as assistant and then as chief.
  Indeed, there have been only seven chief film censors
since the office was
  quote  
established in 1916.  
    Despite the precedent-setting nature of the films and
video bill, it was passed unopposed.  
    Given the responsibility assumed by National Party
Opposition MP Katherine O'Regan for getting the measure
hoisted up the order paper and into the government 's urgency
motion, the whole exercise suggests a combined operation by
the Labour-National axis.  
    Party managers whose joint, and not-so-hidden, agenda
appears to be to keep Parliament safe for the two major
parties, might well have concluded that with an election
in four   months'   time this was the way to go.
  Impulse-buying, not the appeal to intelligence, is
perceived to be the way to deal with the electorate, given the
sticky climate created by the joyless-sex movement.   Best
for both parties to join together on this issue to limit any
debate that could be provoked by a third party or independent
candidates out on the hustings.  
    To see or not to see scenes of sex being enjoyed
between consenting adults, that was the question.   How
fortunate to have an electoral system that enshrines the two
party system and disallows any effective parliamentary debate
and progress on an issue that is as fundamental as
bread.  
    The great pity is that so little of chief film censor
Everard 's commonsense appears to have got through to thinking
citizens.   His voice has tended to be buried in the tirades
of those blinkered groups with their misguided messianic
ambitions to a better society through guilt and
repression.  
    These are just a few of the important things the film
censor has had to say over the years:
&bullet;   Research shows the concern is where
sexual violence is condoned and where a film endorses sexual
violence.
&bullet;   Audiences for sexually explicit
films are by no means the stereotyped "raincoat brigade".
  A high percentage of women are among those hiring sex
tapes.   At public screenings, audiences are a cross-section
of the population in age, sex and material circumstances.
  Some theatres have special rates for pensioners.
&bullet;   Young people are more
sophisticated and visually discerning than elders.
&bullet;   We (film censors) do become
"desensitised" to some degree, because we have to be
objective.  
    It is salutary, given the recent running-for-cover
performance in Parliament, to discover that all is by
no means lost.   At the other end of town stands another
kind of House of Representatives, the Embassy of Courtenay
Place, where, in July, large and enthusiastic crowds
attended the 19th Wellington Film Festival.  
    Once again audiences were treated to films from all
over the world that are entertaining and mature in their
depiction of love and its many forms of sexual expression.  
    One of them, an Italian film called Cinema Paradiso
could not have landed at a more opportune time.   It is a
marvellous and joyous celebration of life when movie-going
was the focus for the community.  
    The local priest is the village censor, who insists
kissing scenes and any suggestion of passionate touching be
excised.   The movies are of a period when   lovers'  
lips met astonishingly chastely and stars remained fully
clothed.  
    Father Adelfio is a great comic and human creation.
  The dilemma his face reflects when making his decisions
tells us more about his anxieties than the passion he has for
protecting his flock.   He lacks the kind of objectivity
that comes from life experience and joy in living.  
    Given Everard 's record this finding cannot be applied
to the outgoing film censor.  
    Whether it can be applied to strident pressure groups
which continue to foment fear and guilt about sex, and prefer
not to see how better they might approach love and sex in
their own lives, is quite another matter.      
  

  photo    caption  
      TELEVISION   advertisements are a pain
in the retina when they interrupt your favourite programme,
but the secret to enjoying ads, like everything else in life,
lies in attitude.  
    Watch them critically and they 'll tell you much about
the state of contemporary culture.   Analysing ads may be
more fun in bigger countries whose companies have massive
advertising budgets, but over the years   our   ads have
been collecting a fair share of international creative
awards.   What are they showing us about ourselves?
  Social demarcation for one thing.  
    By the late   '80s  , members of that mythical
social class, yuppiedom, were popping up on ads for
everything from fashion and finance to service industries like
electricity.  
    The BNZ opted for grainy, slice-of-ordinary-life
vignettes (using taxi drivers, school teachers, new parents) to
express its contrition over past mistakes and its integrity.
  But other companies like Electricorp, Telecom and the Gas
Association flexed their corporate muscles in ads that went
overboard on pace and glamour.   It seemed that the more
prosaic the product, the more stylish the ad.  
    Take that terribly glamorous ad for the Gas
Association, which could as easily have been promoting the
contemporary designer lifestyle.   A soap-opera scenario
unfolds with a gorgeous young couple bickering in the back of a
taxi.   Cut to their stylish apartment where she "cools off"
in the shower while he whisks up a treat in the wok.   Gas is
modern and sophisticated, not fuddy duddy.   Gas is
cool.  
    Then there was Postbank and its yuppie couple
angsting over mortage lending rates, she sexy in a white
cotton bathrobe and wet hair, he brooding and intelligent in
fashionable horn-rimmed glasses.  
    But Telecom went all out for the yuppie vote of
confidence.   Its pre-crash ad looked like a promotion for
fast cars and flash clothes.   A cocksure young gun with a
phone in his briefcase devastated the boardroom with his
effrontery before leaping into his convertible and racing off
to his girlfriend.  
    Two years after the sharemarket crash, Telecom ads
showing all those sparkling, beautifully dressed men and women
doing glorious phone business look slightly unconvincing, but
Telecom is covering both ends of the market.   Upbeat,
  photos    caption  
upmarket ads for the business sector, downmarket
and downright sentimental for homemakers (  "Are you
lonesome tonight?"   warbles Elvis as the truckie places
a toll call to his wife).  
    Elevating the "perceived value" of a workaday product
with fashion-conscious ads set to a classic hits soundtrack
was   the   advertising trend of the late   '80s  .
  It 's come along hand in hand with the deregulation of our
economy.   Corporations that used to exist in splendid
government-given isolation are now turning up the advertising
heat to beat the competition - as seen in the slightly
hysterical ad Television One ran in the month before the launch
of TV3.  
    Made by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, it opened with a Steven
Spielberg-esque scenario.  
    A little boy put down his bicycle, spellbound by a
strange eminence in the sky - no, not ET in a spaceship but a
satellite-receiving dish feeding into TV1.   Set to a
piercing operatic score, the ad gathered breakneck speed,
touching down on the network 's superior points with the aid of
snappy editing and film techniques (hand-held cameras, shots
taken from the television screen).  
    The camera cut from a smirking Phillip Leishman to Liam
Jeory at Heathrow reporting on a fictional Air New Zealand
hijack and back to Richard Long fronting a shamelessly
sensationalist bit of simulated news.   The message?
  Viewers can rest assured that when their next-door
neighbours are held under siege under the sodium lights of
suburbia, Television One will be there to record it.  
    Saatchi and Saatchi managing director David Walden
describes the ad as challenging, instant, immediate and as
dynamic as television itself.   Preferring   his  
description (  "professional"  ) to mine
(  "slick"  ), he explained:     "People
don't sit down every night waiting for the next effort from
Saatchi and Saatchi.   They sit down to be informed and
entertained.   We 've got to try to reflect something of
Television One and do it in an entertaining
way."      
    But at least stylistic excess makes for fascinating
viewing.   And it 's a refreshing change from table-tops full
of happy families salivating over their rice risotto.   Or
all those baby-booming thirty somethingers doing up their
villas in between instant-coffee breaks.  
    Note: Today 's two-year-olds are tomorrow 's teenagers.
  Expect to see the teen market more heavily targetted in the
next 10 years as the offspring of the "baby-boom" generation
reach chocolate
  photos    caption  
bar-buying age.   Industry pundits are also predicting the
rise of the "empty-nesters": people in their 50s and 60s whose
children have grown up and moved out and who have high
disposable incomes to spend and (to quote one art director)
  "superannuation coming out their ears."    
    Right now, the major target market are white,
middle-class families.   But with one in three marriages
ending in divorce, how typical is the typical nuclear family?
  Full marks to Fernleaf for its brave, innovative ads
depicting a little girl visiting her newly separated father in
one ad, her mother in the other.   Families break up, times
change, but the quality of butter remains constant.   And
we 'll keep watching to see whether the couple get back
together again.   The brainchild of Saatchi 's creative
director, Roy Meares, he rates it as a personal favourite.  
      "Every time an ad breaks new ground it makes it
easier for others to take risks,"   he says of his
decision to forsake the traditional butter ad (Ellie Smith
whipping up scones in the kitchen) for gritty realism.
  By which he demonstrated the sort of unerring instinct for
a calculated risk that makes him one of the most creative
of the "creatives" (as copywriters and art directors are called
in the industry).  
    Once the target market has been pinpointed, an ad 's
script and concept is pre-tested and re-tested on
representative groups as it goes through the creative process.
  But according to Sue Worthington, senior copywriter at
Lintas New Zealand:     "You can research and plan, but
in the end a lot has to do with instinct: that 's what
ultimately separates a good advertising person from a bad
one."      
    It pays to check the target market 's instincts
against your own, however.   Sue 's colleague, art director
Allistair Elliott, relates the cautionary tale of an ad which
featured a male doctor sitting down to a meal of trim-fat meat.
  Pre-testing of the concept revealed that, unlike their
mothers, many women today don't trust doctors.   The ad could
have worked, maybe, with a woman doctor wielding the knife and
fork.   In the end, the whole idea was flagged away.  
    Once the content of the ad has been approved, no detail
is left to chance.   Everything you see has been chosen to
amplify the product 's image.  
    Take the series of television ads created by Lintas for
MORE magazine last year.  
    MORE 's marketing people wanted the ads to say "warm,
stylish and intelligent", in 30 seconds.   Once the right
model had been chosen to epitomise the MORE reader, the message
was orchestrated by every detail in her fictional living
room.  
  photos    caption  
  photos    caption  
    Sue explains:     "How did the room say warm,
stylish and intelligent?   It 's intelligent because
there 's a computer in it.   It was warm because it had a
lived-in look, full of articles that were very much 'hers'.
  Stylish, because she looked well-travelled.   The
articles were the sort of things she would pick up on overseas
travels.   We also chose a stylish, upmarket computer, but
made sure it looked userfriendly by sticking on those
little Post-It notes."     The computer spoke to MORE
readers in Ilona Rodgers 's voice (warm, intelligent).   Such
are the salient details at work to impress the innocent
television viewer.  
    There are various staple advertising styles that rarely
get aired in New Zealand ads.   Animation, for example,
because it 's extremely costly.   Likewise, Lotto-style big
production numbers with a cast of hundreds and extravagant,
tailor-made sets.   Few companies can afford to shoot their
ads in exotic locations (although Steinlager did it in print
with its   "They 're-drinking-our-beer-here"  
ads).  
    And we don't have an endless supply of genuine
celebrities on hand to endorse products.   Country Goodness
used socialite Judith Baragwanath and MP Trevor de Cleene to
endorse its cottage cheese, but usually, if you can't lure a
blue-collar Brit (Dennis Waterman) or an American action man
(Lee Majors) half way round the world, any New Zealand
sportsperson (or their mum) will do.  
    Wherever it 's appropriate, a New Zealand ad likes to be
a humorous ad.   Every night, couch
    potatos    potatoes     without remote control
are treated to a stream of jocular blokes, whingeing kids,
wacky housewives, funny faces and drop-dead parting shots
(memorably, in the ads promoting CER, when the Kiwi exporter
wheels a rack of gold and green cricket shirts past a
dumbstruck Aussie passport control officer.
    "Someone 's got to make your team look
good,"   smirks the Kiwi.)  
    In a decade dominated by business mergers and
acquisitions, advertising agencies underwent their own form of
regrouping, resulting in more complicated names (Hutcheson
Knowles Marinkovich - Rialto) and fewer real creative
opportunities.  
    Creative talent is hiving off, or being headhunted, to
Sydney.   Local agencies are being bought out by big
internationals, and the gloomier industry pundits predict
that soon we 'll be left with only two or three trail-blazingly
creative agencies, the rest becoming clearing houses for
ads made across the Tasman or imported from America.  
    It 's a notion that doesn't worry Roy Meares, whose own
agency, McKay King, merged with Saatchi and Saatchi this
year.  
        "There 'll always be clients who see the
value of importing ads so they can spend more money on media
[that is, buying spots on TV or radio or in print], but those
ads won't be tailored for New Zealanders and that 's what makes
an ad stand out."      
    So do humour and style.   So does sexism.   The
sheer awfulness of the Bluebird (  "the Hip
Chip"  ) ad, with a jeans-clad girl sauntering past
outstretched male hands, lodges the product in the mind.
  As does the supremely tacky ad for Rio underwear where the
female cop inexplicably whips off her skirt in the 
  photo    caption  
midst of handcuffing a crook.  
    Consumers, especially women, want ideas, not insults.
  Persil pulled it off with their scientist and his son in
the soap powder lab, a welcome departure from the cheery mum in
a laundry.   And soap powder has to be one of the hardest
products to push with panache: it 's unaspirational.   You
can't eat it or wear it.   The most it can do for your
lifestyle is keep it clean.  
    As for ageism, if the   Crofters'   Cakes granny on
a motorbike and the sweet old Mainland Cheese man are anything
to go by, perhaps that particular "ism" will be shown the back
door in the   '90s   as well.  
    Some critics blame advertising for altering
society.   But advertising people insist that ads don't
create social trends, they reflect them.   Far from being
flamboyantly creative, advertising is a conservative
industry involving careful research in the service of cautious
clients.  
    As John Sheridan, creative director of Auckland agency
Leo Burnett, says, you don't make good ads without good
clients.  
        "Advertising is always going to take the
middle ground.   It 's certainly not going to lead social
trends because it can't.   It 's essentially a group
business.   No single person makes a decision, and
whenever that happens there 's always a tendency for a
conservative decision to arise.   To some extent advertising
is about compromise.   And controls in advertising are far
more acute and absolute than controls on
television."      
    In a medium as pursuasive and pervasive as
advertising, perhaps there 's a case for a little judicious
tokenism here and there.   Maori and Polynesian people are
still noticeable by their absence on ads, unless it 's a plea
for hepatitis inoculation or the public spirited ads for
1990 showing Polynesian, Asian and European children hand in
hand or raising candles aloft.   Levene 's, Air New
Zealand and Telecom (again) are showing the way to go,
unobtrusively ensuring that good-looking, successful,
brown-skinned people take a turn in front of their cameras.
Writers like Sue Worthington at Lintas are keen to reflect New
Zealandness in their ads, a down-country, outdoor mateyness
ideally suited to mass market, snack food accounts like Eta
Ripples (the Indiana Jones-type hero traversing the length of
his speeding semi-trailer to get to his chip supply in the
back).  
      "Five years ago, clients would pay big money
for the BBC English voiceover,"   she says.
      "Nowadays, New Zealanders like themselves and a
lot more advertisers want to capture
    somthing    something     distinctly New
Zealand, like a person 's accent."      
    But we no longer live in a social incubator at the
bottom of the world from which a true New Zealand voice is
going to rise, Phoenix-like, from the ashes.  
    Any attempt at capturing New Zealandness in our ads is
bound to be an exercise in nostalgia, or a piece of
selfconscious myth mongering.   Like it or not, our
contemporary indigenous culture reflects the latest trends in
Los Angeles or London as much as the history of the people who
live here.   And advertising styles in the   '90s   will
inevitably follow suit.    
        ABORTION DEBATE - THE THIN RED
LINE    
      TIME WAS  , when abortion was regarded as
the big social issue of the   '70s  .   But here it comes
again, looming up as the issue of the   '90s  .  
    Abortion, as we all know, is a no-win debate.   Each
side has its entrenched attitudes.  
    One side centres its focus on the health and welfare of
women, making her interests paramount.   The other
believes just as ardently in the right of the foetus to be
allowed its own crack at health and welfare.  
    Two things happened late last year to bring the debate
into focus again.  
    One was the emergence of Operation Rescue teams, New
Zealand copycat groups who picked up on the rowdy way abortion
protests are being staged in the United States and decided to
try it here.  
      The other was the December 9 "guilty" verdict
brought against an 18-year-old Timaru man charged with causing
the death of an unborn child   "in such a manner that
he would have been guilty of murder if the child had become a
human being"  .  
    What happened was that Aaron Henderson and his girl
conceived a child.   Then they had a row and split up.
  Henderson exacted appalling revenge - kicking, punching and
beating his former girlfriend so badly that their six-month-old
foetus was later delivered stillborn.   That was what he
wanted.     "I don't want that baby born,"   he 'd
told the police.  
    The jury of eight women and four men were instructed by
Mr Justice Roper that they had to put aside any feelings of
sympathy, prejudice and ill-will in making their decision
over Henderson 's actions.  
    Henderson had not been charged with murder, he said,
because only a human being could be the victim of murder.
  And according to legal precedent, an unborn child was not a
human being.  
      "At what stage of the pregnancy would it become
an unborn child?   My direction to you on this point, as a
matter of law, is that you must be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that this child, at the time of the attack by the
accused, was capable of being born alive, having regard to the
medical evidence,"   said Mr Justice Roper.  
      "If you are not satisfied on that point, that 's
the end of the charge."    
    The jury was in no doubt.   Henderson, they said, was
guilty.  
    Which all puts an interesting new slant on the abortion
debate.  
    What, academically speaking, is the difference between
someone punching a woman in the abdomen to make sure a foetus
is born dead and pushing a tube inside her to suck it out and
bring about the same result?  
    Sure, the Timaru killing was committed with extreme
brutality.   But let 's not get confused here with the
injuries inflicted upon the mother - that, however
shocking, is not the issue here.  
    The other sort of killing (or "termination" to keep
things unemotional) is medical abortion, done coolly and calmly
and hygienically, in a clinic, after due deliberation and in
accordance with the law.  
    The Henderson affair happened because this
father-to-be decided he didn't want the baby to live.   Legal
abortions happen because the   mother   decides she
doesn't want the baby to live - due to a variety of pressures
and problems.  
    The Henderson assault was upon a child who 'd spent an
estimated 26 weeks in the womb.   With legal abortions,
termination usually happens when the unborn child has
got through only three months of development.  
    There 's no way a three-month foetus can survive outside
the womb.   Sometimes a six-month foetus can be saved,
but only with the utmost care and all the technology a modern
hospital can offer.  
    Where does this leave us?   With a law that says
(contrary to all scientific logic) that a foetus in early
development is   not   an unborn child?   That we
approve of the removal of such cell-growths in the early
stages, but that it 's not okay, in fact an awful crime, to do
away with it once it reaches a stage where medical science
  might   be able to keep it alive were it born
naturally?  
    Try to put aside your compassion over the beating meted
out to the pregnant mother in the Timaru case and consider
  logically   our attitudes over the status of the
unborn.   We 've got to face it - there 's a problem here&semi; one
that comes full circle back to the point the battling factions
have always been at loggerheads over.   That is, when does
"life" begin?  
    Does it begin at conception?   Religious arguments
over when the soul comes on to the scene can go on for ever.
  But, biologically, even the most pro-choice of us would
find it hard to argue convincingly that a foetus is
anything other than a developing human baby.  
    It ain't a pine tree or a turtle.  
    The next problem is to make up our minds whether it 's
right to do away with a developing baby at any point from
conception on - and if it is, upon what grounds it can be
justified.  
    Pro-choice advocates have
    aleady    already     firmed up their
viewpoints on that one - it 's the mother 's choice, they say.
  Her life.   Her body.   Her   right   to consider
the various legal grounds upon which she can seek abortion.
  Her   right   to decide.  
    Pro-life people still argue that we don't have that
right.   And the well-used mental-health grounds don't
impress people like Keith Wicks of SPUC.   "  Most
of the 10,000 abortions now being done every year are done for
mental health reasons.   What that 's saying is that 10,000
New Zealand women will go bonkers if they have a baby."  
  He doesn't believe it - he has more faith than that in
women 's resilience.  
    And if we are of the opinion as a society that it 's
illegal for Aaron Henderson to do what he did - that is, to
kill an unborn child (putting aside   how   he did it) -
isn't it illogical for us to say that it 's quite okay for
10,000 women a year to do it too?  
    There 's more.   If we decide an unborn child is only
a human when it 's old enough to survive outside the womb, then
how are we going to adapt our thinking on abortion to cope with
science 's ability to save ever-more premature infants?  
    Already, science is managing to keep alive 50% of
babies born as early as 24 weeks, or six months, of gestation.
  A few, only around 5%, can be saved at 23 weeks.   Yet
some abortions, under certain circumstances, are carried out as
late as 20 weeks.   The gap - that thin red line - is
narrow.  
    Watch out, in this new decade, for the gap to become
even narrower and for the arguments to become even hotter.
  Like it or not, the abortion argument still has a way to
go.   -   LINDSEY DAWSON        
  

          DISADVANTAGED CHILDREN AND
ECCE  ECCE=Early Childhood Care and Education        
    The Ritchies quote American research indicating that
for middle  -  class children, daycare made little
difference, but for the disadvantaged children, such as
those from the ghetto,    'daycare was of positive value
in language and cognitive development'  .  
    The Meade Report cites the benefits, based on an
American study at Ypsilanti, Michigan, that accrue to children
from disadvantaged families when they are given
  'worthwhile early care and education
experiences'  .  
    Young people who have had this experience are more
likely to complete their education, to seek tertiary
education, to be self-supporting - and conversely they are
less likely to be arrested or to have a teenage pregnancy.
  It was concluded that based on social costs saved, each
$100 spent at the pre-school stage would save $400 to $700 in
later costs.  
    The authors rightly note that not all pre-school
services will have this effect, since there were
   'structural'   features present in the American
pre-school.   It is unfortunate that these features were not
specified, since they are vital.  
    The researcher associated with this pre-school is Dr
David Weikart, who was invited to New Zealand to address
the 1987 Conference on Early Childhood Care and Education
as the keynote speaker.  
    In his address he made the following points (he was
talking about children from the age of two to five,
  not   infants): This is a time when a child moves from
the world of home as a toddler into an external world where he
relates with strange, big adults, strange peers.   There
must be a carefully constructed specific curriculum in order
to be effective.   Highly trained staff must be used (who
are likely to be university graduates) and there must be
on-going supervision and in-service training.   US$6
million had been put into the project.   This was a highly
funded, highly structured, sophisticated research
project.    
        SOCIAL BENEFITS OF ECCE      
    Contradictory claims of social benefits to be derived
from daycare on the one hand and home care on the other in
the pre-school phase are quite bewildering.  
    The Meade Report is adamant on the benefits.   The
Burns paper of 1988 acknowledges the dangers of increased
aggressive behaviour.   Dr Raymond Moore, an American early
childhood educationist and advocate of home teaching, likened
the consequences of grouping small children together and
expecting restrained and non-aggressive behaviour to taking
your dog down to the local dog pound and expecting time spent
with the pack to improve his behaviour.  
    Moore cited American psychologist Urie Bronfenbrenner
and his team of Cornell University researchers, who identified
a    'social contagion'   as a result of too early
and too constant segregation with age peers.  
    It is questionable to claim, as the report does, that
self  -  confidence and trust and a deeper knowledge of a
child 's own identity are benefits to be found in early
childhood services.   Some studies have shown that children
who have been in daycare from one year of age exhibit
  more   dependent behaviour than children who have been
at home with their mothers.   Another study shows that
two-year-olds exhibited    'detachment-like'  
behaviour and three-year-olds displayed anxious, ambivalent
attachment behaviours when reunited with their mothers after
daycare.   Other studies conclude differently.   There is
a great deal of difference in the results of studies, and
enough variation so that virtually any hypothesis one cared to
pose that related to ECCE could be supported by legitimate and
high-quality research.   It is this uncertainty the working
party chose to ignore.  
    Ann Crane, president of the New Zealand Association of
Child Psychotherapists, had not read the newly released Meade
Report when I went to see her.   When she read the section
headed   'Myth 1: That it is bad for the child to be
separated from its mother'  , she was incredulous and
appalled.         `  You   can't   say when a
child can do without its mother.   You   can   say
that a young child 's best environment is with a "maternally
preoccupied person".   You cannot lump all pre-schoolers
together.   You have to be aware of all stages of infant
development and you can then make a wiser judgment of what the
infant can tolerate.
    `  You   can   say that for babies the
attachment, individuation and separation phases are absolutely
vital to accomplish.   We now know, quite concretely, that
you can't be sure of anything about the child 's readiness to
separate till about 36 months.
    '  We know that it 's better to introduce the
world in small doses to the baby.   We know that through
this maternally preoccupied person the baby learns to love, to
hate and to repair.   That has the most profound
implications for a peaceful society and for harmonious
marriages.   Take away the development of this ability and
what will be the consequences?
    '  We know that a mother doesn't have to be
perfect - just good enough.   What we are seeing here is
women destroying women - their own real power and strength.
  There are a number of child psychotherapists in New
Zealand who could write a report in contrast to this, only
we 're up to our eyebrows dealing with the consequences of the
placing of little value on childhood and of the failure of
systems to recognise individuality in
children.'      
    The Child Health Committee of the Board of Health
produced in 1987 a report entitled 'Parenting', by John
Williams, principal clinical psychologist for the Wellington
Hospital Board.   The psychological needs of children
include the following:   'Social relationships,
first in an intense form, with parents where there is an
experience of love and security which is continuing and
predictable&semi; then with other family members and ultimately
with peers and various members of the community.'    
    Eminent British psychiatrist D. W. Winnicott:
    'There is special significance in the devotion of
the ordinary good mother to her infant, the capacity for
eventual emotional maturity being founded as a result of
devotion.   Mass interference at this point in a society
would quickly and effectively lessen the democratic potential
of that society, just as it would diminish the richness of its
culture.'      
    The kibbutz (Israeli communal village) is often cited
in support of the socially beneficial results of communal
childcare.   But there are major differences.   There is a
well-developed kibbutz training scheme for care-givers.
  Child-rearing absorbs a major part of the kibbutz budget
and energy.   Most of the care-givers are fellow kibbutz
members and thus share an ideology with parents, resulting in
minimal inconsistency between home and daycare.  
    In a reassertion of the   parents'   traditional
role, most kibbutzim now have children sleeping at home with
their families.   Significantly, the pressure for this
move comes from the kibbutz-raised parent generation.   Even
during the hours in care, contact is maintained with
parents.   Breastfeeding mothers visit regularly and work a
shorter day.   Parents and grandparents are encouraged to
drop in.   Children are taken to see their parents at
work.  
    Kibbutz children, therefore, live in a child-centred,
socialist, village society.   While there may be lessons to
be learned in terms of staff training and curriculum content,
direct comparability in terms of the benefits or drawbacks of
daycare in an urban, individualistic setting is limited.
    Childcare in New Zealand   by Dr Anne Smith and Dr
David Swain provides a valuable New Zealand perspective on
kibbutz child-rearing.  
        ENHANCING OR REPLACING THE
FAMILY?      
    The Meade committee was required to take into account
the five principles underlying all government social policy
reform (none of which make specific reference to children).
  The last principle is   'enhancing the family unit
in New Zealand society'  .  
    The need most commonly articulated by people working
with families is the need for parents to receive education for
and support in parenting.   That will often mean support in
their own home.  
    The Meade Report is ambivalent about the family.
  Although it states that   'The family or whanau is
the main focus of early childhood care and
education'   and   'The primary responsibility for
young children lies with the family or whanau'  , it
later says that    'measures to assist families who
choose to provide all of their children 's care and education
themselves have not been considered'  .   This is
because   'the scope of our task focused primarily on
complementary care and education'  .  
    In 1977 Anne Meade, a sociologist who was then an
assistant research officer for the Department of Education,
wrote with regret of the resistance of the Playcentre and
kindergarten movements to providing daycare places,
because of the ideology of those movements that   'the
family should be the main socialisation agent until the child
starts school'  .  
    In 1988 Anne Meade, social policy adviser (education)
in the Prime Minister 's Department, convened the working group
that produced the Meade Report, which states:   'Early
childhood services are a modern invention to replace the
previous extended family ...'     A strange
interpretation indeed of the social policy goal -
  'enhancing the family unit in New Zealand
society'  .   It appears, rather, to be meeting the
goal of the Socialist Action League in its adoption of the
text 'The New Rise of Feminism' at its national conference in
Wellington in 1973:  
        'There is a much deeper understanding that
women can only be emancipated through deep-going social
changes, which remove from individual women the responsibility
for child-rearing and domestic work, placing this on society
as a whole ...
    '  The concept that society as a whole should
take the responsibility of caring for children is embodied
in the demand for government-financed, 24-hour,
community-controlled childcare centres ...   In addition,
this demand opens up the possibilities of   replacing the
family   institution ...   With its thrust against the
family institution, the women 's liberation movement is
profoundly revolutionary.'      
    A   'profoundly revolutionary'   approach
to childcare has been adopted, in essence, by the government
of a fairly conservative nation which has no idea that such a
profound shift has occurred.   Yet that shift has been
frequently signalled.   In 1984 incoming Labour Party
president Margaret Wilson said,   'As long as women are
seen as having primary responsibility for the personal care of
their children there seems little chance for substantial
change in the position of women.'    
        MARXIST FEMINISTS AND ECCE      
    In her history of the women 's movement in New Zealand,
  Up From Under  , feminist Marxist writer Christine
Dann wrote:   'Feminist energies were focused ... on ...
means of improving women 's income and status.     These
included better access to paid employment and to
childcare.  '     Dann relates the support given by
the women 's liberation movement to the unionisation of
childcare workers, who in 1982 formed the Early Childhood
  Workers'   Union.   However, as long as childcare is
still not freely available, provided by government and
employers, Dann says that childcare remains
  'unfinished business'   for the movement.  
    The economic basis of the argument for childcare is
seen more clearly when it is realised that it is a cause not
just of feminists but of Marxist feminists such as the
Christchurch Women 's Union, who, Dann reports,    'did a
survey of childcare needs in Aranui, a working-class suburb,
and produced a leaflet called "The Housewife and Her Labour
under Capitalism"'  .  
    The Working Women 's Alliance, another Marxist feminist
grouping, presented a   'Statement of Principle'  
which listed free childcare facilities as an essential item to
  'improve the position of working people in general and
women in particular'  .  
    This is entirely legitimate activity.   The
beneficiaries of the reform are clearly identified.   What
is questionable is the later procedure of re-casting the
legitimate economic concerns of women as an issue to benefit
children.   The editorial of the October 1988
  Broadsheet   (released at virtually the same time as
the Meade Report) asserts:   'It seems as if it will be
the job of feminists to go on calling for the liberation of
children to ensure that they do not remain isolated prisoners
in their little nuclear homes, and to continue the demands for
the recognition of alternative family
groupings.'    
        WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN CONFLICT      
    The section of the Meade Report headed   'Status
of Women and Women 's Changing Needs'   throws some light
on the philosophical underpinning of the report.  
    '    We consider that women should have the
right of choice and control over their lives.   Availability
of good-quality early childhood care and education
services is a basic requirement.   "Social policy for young
children makes very little difference to the role of men.
  It is women who in our society, as in many others, are
responsible for the care of children.   Measures to promote
the rights of children are frequently disguised ways of
controlling the role of women".   This statement is a
quotation from Dr Geraldine McDonald, now deputy director of
the New Zealand Council for Educational Research.  
    '    We see no reason why the needs of women and
children cannot be taken equally into account in the design
and funding of early childhood services - in the same way as
Maori cultural survival has been seen as of equal importance
to children 's needs within the te kohanga reo
movement.'      
    Indeed there is a note of rebuke in the report for
past governments which have allotted funding
  'based on the benefits that early childhood care and
education offers for   children   - and, in the case of
nga kohanga reo, what it offers for Maori cultural
survival.     The state has shown little interest in
the value of early childhood services for
  mothers   [my emphasis].   The establishment of the
Ministry of Women 's Affairs provides tangible evidence of this
government 's commitment to women 's participation in
economic and social life.   What is needed now is for
sufficient funds to be made available to early childhood care
and education for this to become possible.  '    
    This section concedes that the interests of women and
children may sometimes be in conflict.   It states a belief
that both needs can be met by the same device.   I believe
there is a conflict.   I don't believe both needs can easily
be equally met.   I don't believe there is much equality in
the means with which the cases are put.   One party has
language, maturity and power.   The other party has
  'no language but a cry'  .  
    We choose, very often, not to listen to that cry.
  Sometimes it is inaudible.   Children stop crying after
a while when their cries produce no response.   Very, very
few adults are investigating that silence.  
    Ann Crane, president of the New Zealand Child
  Psychotherapists'   Association, says,   'I
could go into any daycare centre in the city and find you
children who are in shock.'    
    Several needs are in conflict in the relationship
between children and their parents.   One is the need to
bring in sufficient income to maintain the family.   Another
is the need for a child to receive the care of competent
adults who love her or him.  
    My belief is that there is an inevitable conflict
between the need of women to live full lives in the workplace
and the need of young children to be looked after, at least
for the majority of their time, by somebody who is, as
Bronfenbrenner puts it, irrationally attached to them.   I
know of no very satisfactory way around the moral dilemma.
  But I do think it should be faced honestly.  
    Those conflicting needs have in the recent past been
met by sacrificing those of the mother to the child.   It is
now suggested that the child 's needs be sacrificed to those of
the mother (though the arrangement has been made more sanitary
by a skilful redefinition of the needs of the child).
  Neither solution is just, nor reflects the many truths:
&bullet;   That a baby or small child at home with a
contented and competent parent is in an ideal situation.
&bullet;   That children require stimulation, which
can sometimes best be obtained with other children in a small
group with a skilled, warm adult.
&bullet;   That pre-school children can benefit from
opportunities to socialise with other children in a secure
environment.
&bullet;   That for children in problem-beset homes,
good daycare can provide an environment of safety, stimulation
and benevolence that they would otherwise not know.  
    In a rational society there will be many choices
reflecting the many truths, and attempting to reconcile the
conflicting needs.   There will also be careful and
impartial research as a basis for policy.   It is
significant, for example, that the Christchurch child
development study revealed a low level of demand from mothers
for childcare services.   It further revealed that
  'for the majority of women in this cohort,
participation in the workforce was very much secondary to
their primary role of motherhood and
child  -  rearing'  .  
        TWO TRUTHS      
          '  I used daycare for my first child -
the best I could find, with a well-qualified owner/supervisor.
  The centre was quite well off for outdoor play space and
it was safety conscious.   But it was a long day for him and
I just felt guilty.   There was a high staff turnover, and
quite a brisk, impersonal sort of atmosphere.
    '  So with the second one I decided I 'd do it
differently.   I actually took a job in a daycare centre and
took her with me, but I really couldn't take it for too long.
  It was just too depressing.   Most of the other staff
were just girls, young kids who didn't know how to talk to
children, and really didn't know anything about them.
  Fairly inarticulate girls, so you can imagine there wasn't
a lot of talk.   The language of some of the kids, though,
was amazing!   I 'd never heard some of it before!
    `  At sleep-time the children had to sleep on
awful plastic platform things.   The sheets would always
fall off, so they were lying on those cold plastic things just
in their underwear.   I remember tears every time.
  '    So we left after a few weeks.   Now my
daughter goes to a superb kindergarten, which gives me about
three hours a day to work from home.   It 's not long enough
really, but I just need to look at the difference between them
- my elder one so much more tense and withdrawn, and the
younger one so outgoing and confident and happy, and I just
feel that daycare had a lot to do with the
difference.'      
    A two-year-old was eating a sandwich, inspecting
it after every bite, and admiring what shape she had made with
the remnant -  a snake, a moon.     'She picked that
up at daycare,'   said her mother.   She drew a
picture.     'That 's a rainbow,'   she said.
    'That 's from daycare,'   said her mother.
      'I haven't mentioned rainbows to
her.'       She sang a fantastic combination of
nursery rhymes with great joy.     'That 's from
daycare,'   said her mother.       'I can
never remember those things.'       She chattered
about various people.     'They 're her daycare
friends,'   said her mother.  
    The child attends this excellent university
cr&egrave;che for a few hours a week.   The rest of
the time is spent with her mother (including time at a parent
and child weekly play group) or with her father.  
      Complementary   care and education par
excellence.  
        ALTERNATIVES      
    There is an alternative to either immuring an unhappy
mother in her home or removing a child from his or hers.
  That is regarding a domestic dwelling as a workplace.
  The mother or father at home may well soon be receiving a
care-giver 's wage, as recommended by the Royal Commission
on Social Policy and endorsed by Dr Michael Cullen.   Why
should the home not also be the workplace of people hired to
care for the children?  
      A group of women in management have been lobbying
for home childcare to be tax deductible beyond the present
risible $200 a year.   A Cabinet Minister told them that the
Government did not want to create a Victorian class of home
servants.  
    Ombudsman Nadja Tollemache, former deputy dean of
Auckland University Law School and the mother of eight
children, believes that home childcare should be properly
paid,   'not under the table'  , and should be
regarded as important work.   Tax deductibility is important
for the employer and would enable a realistic pay rate.
  She does not favour the use of cr&egrave;ches.  
    Why is a private home less desirable as a workplace
than a factory is?   Is it the personal services that are
rendered that makes it Victorian servitude?   If that is so,
then what about the hospital wardsmaid or the hairdresser?  
    If parents prefer that their children stay home in
their own environment to be looked after by a substitute
care-giver, why should that arrangement be any less deserving
of government support, by means of tax deductibility, than
daycare centres are by means of direct grants?  
    Brian Easton, unique in New Zealand as an economist
who makes public statements about children, has recommended
that the Government give parents grants to look after their
children or give them tax deductions to pay other people to do
it.   He is opposed to direct state funding of childcare
centres because this does not give rights to the children.
  Easton states, however, that   'conceptually, the
grant should be to the children, not to the parents.
    The children "contract" with the parents to look after
them.  '    
    June Mariu, president of the Maori Women 's Welfare
League, says,   'The state should make it possible for
mothers to stay home and rear their children.'    
    Isolation of the care-giver and child can be a
problem.   However, the care-giver can also be
parent-substitute at kindergarten, playcentre, or at informal
play groups.  
    The absence of other adults to monitor the behaviour
of care-givers presents the same difficulty in this instance,
as it does with the 'family daycare' schemes, the backyard,
unlicensed, informal minder, or, indeed, the mother or father
at home with the child.   However, even formal daycare
centres with a number of adults on the staff can be dangerous
places for children, as several cases in the United States and
recently in Australia of sexual and physical abuse of children
in centres attest.  
    Early childhood care and training opportunities should
be available on the same basis to those who will work in the
home workplace as they are to prospective daycare centre
workers.  
    Helen May Cook, a childcare activist, wrote in
  Mind that Child  :   'During the early
child-rearing years women who work lead a rather crazed
existence, trying to manage by continually propping up a
system that never stays stable for very long.     The baby
gets sick, the centre closes down, the minder shifts away, the
hours of work change, the fees go up, there 's no after school
care...  '    
    She argues for   'a much broader look at the
structure of the workplace in relation to the domestic world
...     Several centuries ago the domestic and the
workplace were often joined together in the family unit, but
they are now firmly separated by miles of motorway,
impenetrable fences, age demarcation and rigid time schedules.
  So far the concentration has been on child-based solutions
where the workplace remains much the same and we arrange the
children according to its needs.   If our children are as
important as we say they are we should be looking towards
changes in the adult world.   For example, in many jobs the
presence of a worker at a desk in a communal space is not
necessary all the time.   Many people could work at home
for part of the time, with much less hassle and far more
productivity.  '    
    It is hard to see, in this age of computers, word
processors, facsimile machines, mobile telephones and
couriers, why a substantial number of parents, both male and
female, of young children could not work productively for at
least a part of their working week from home.   This is just
one of the strategies which, combined with job-sharing,
flexi-time and part-time work, could revolutionise life for
families with small children.  
      More   magazine investigated   'The
Great Childcare Dilemma'  , reporting on a successful
publishing venture based in four home workplaces where the
needs of parents, children and staff could be met.   These
ideas will not be widely used, not because they can't work but
because they are in conflict with what has become the
Establishment view, in which the new norm is: women
full  -  time in the workforce&semi; children in early
childhood services.      
  

          ROUGH JUSTICE      
          Inside The New Zealand Justice
System        
      BY DAVID McCLOUGHLIN    
  photo  
  caption  
    Papakura District Court judge Ken Richardson
thought two years and 11 months was justice enough for Barry
Frederick Pompey, the unemployed truck driver who slaughtered
Pat   Evans'   family.  
    Pompey was driving drunk at 11 o'clock on a Sunday
morning when he tried to overtake at high speed on a blind
bend in South Auckland. Ron Evans (50) and his sons Craig (13)
and Robert (19) died as Pompey 's powerful ute smashed into
their little Toyota Starlet.  
    Pat Evans was told the news in her hospital bed, where
she was recovering from a disease which had forced the
amputation of her right leg.    
    Ron Evans was a man who wouldn't drink a beer at a
Christmas party.   He and his sons were killed by a man who
was so drunk it 's hard to imagine how he got the key in the
ignition.  
    Pat Evans feels she got rough justice from Judge
Richardson.   Incredibly, Pompey thinks he got rough justice
too.   He 's appealing against the sentence.  
  caption  
  photo  
  photo  
  caption  
      After nearly   11 months in three
hospitals, Pat Evans (54) is finally home, in an echoing house
where she stays up till 2am with the photographs and other
memories of what was a happy family life.  
    She, her engineer husband Ron and first-born son
Robert came to New Zealand from the north of England in 1976.
  Craig was born here.   A year to the day before the
crash the family moved around the corner to a bigger house in
Weymouth, South Auckland.  
      "Who gets justice?"   she asks.  
        "I don't think ordinary folk get justice at
all.   He wasn't just speeding and knocking down a
lampstand you know.   You should have seen the shambles he
made of my husband, my boys, my car, my life.
    "  I don't think he should be fed three meals a
day and getting a choice of videos while I 'm struggling to get
a wheelchair ramp and someone to cut my grass.   Don't tell
me his hard-luck story.
    "  His sister approached me a week before the
sentencing.   I didn't need to see her.   Then his
solicitor approached me to ask if he could say in court that
he had made friends with the family.   It appeared
they 'd done it so it would look better in court.
    "  What could he do to repay me?   If he
came here and worked from dawn to dusk it wouldn't be
that"   - she snaps her fingers -   "of a
recompense.
    "  I wish you could have met my children.
  They were both in their top classes.   My eldest took
eight accounting papers at Manukau tech while holding
down a full-time job.   He had shares, he read the business
pages, he was a clever boy.   My youngest was a fortnight
off his 14th birthday.   That 's what I was giving to the
country and that 's what I had snatched off me.
    "  Our silver wedding anniversary was on October
10.   They were killed on the 29th.   I was looking
forward to the next 25 years.   I 'm not old enough to be
called a widow.   My husband and I worked hard.   We
wanted to grow old, watch our grandchildren.   Where will my
grandchildren come from now?"      
    Pat Evans is very angry and she has good reason to be.
  It 's not the anger of self-pity&semi; there is a great strength
within her that has somehow got her through the death of her
family on top of the loss of her leg.   A lot of her anger
is directed at a system which doesn't want to know about her.
      "I phoned the traffic department because I
wanted to make a statement, but I wanted to make sure it
wouldn't harm the court case.   You should have heard the
run-around I got.   I never found out what I wanted to
know."      
    From hospital she had no end of trouble finding when
and where Pompey would appear in court, even though the
1987 Victims of Offences Act requires that people in her
position be kept fully informed of the legal process.
  Nobody in authority told her the same law says the judge
could be given a victim impact report.   Her
sister-in-law, Cath Winship, who lives on Waiheke Island,
found out just before the sentencing, which was delayed
while a report was drafted.  
        "Do you know how I found out which court
it was in and when?   From that sister of his who came to
see me.   Otherwise I wouldn't have known."      
    There were enormous problems dealing with agencies
like Social Welfare and Accident Compensation which she
was fighting to get help from right up to Easter, when the
hospital suddenly told her to go home.  
    She had to battle to get even limited home help and a
temporary wheelchair ramp to use while she gets used to an
artificial leg.   Even when she got home she was still
arguing for help to get the lawns and gardens done.   Her
voice grows in fury as she describes how she got little action
until in desperation she phoned the office of her local MP,
Roger Douglas.  
        "I said to the charge nurse I needed help
to unpack, to dust.   The house had been empty for five
months.   She said,   'You can do that, it will give
you something to do.'     They didn't want to
know.   I wasn't asking for charity&semi; I 'm entitled to ACC, to
home help.
    "  I told them I was a sick lady needing
help.   They told me not to shout.   I had to do all the
arranging myself, I had to fight and shout.   I had to buy
throat lozenges I was so hoarse from shouting.
    "  I 've got no family&semi; I 'm left to come home to
an empty house.   I need help.   I don't need this flak.
  It would be easier to take a powder."      
      Barry Pompey   appeared for
sentence before Judge Richardson, the longest serving
district court judge in the country, on February 26, four
months after he destroyed the Evans family.   He was charged
with three counts of drink driving causing death.   He
pleaded guilty.  
    The offence carries a maximum penalty of five years in
jail, but a district court judge sitting alone - that is,
without a jury - only has the power to jail someone for three
years.   The judge considered sending Pompey to the High
Court, which could have given him the full sentence, but
decided to handle the case himself.  
    Judge Richardson sentenced Pompey to two years 11
months in jail - the maximum he was able less one month for
the time already spent in custody - and disqualified him from
driving for five years.   Not long ago it would have been a
heavy sentence but now it stands out because of its shortness
in comparison with other sentences around the same
time.  
    Approached and asked why he didn't send Pompey to the
High Court, Judge Richardson said:   "I can't discuss,
quite frankly, my reasons&semi; I 'm not in a situation where I can
do that.   I decided to keep it in the district court
jurisdiction, and that 's that."     He noted that
Pompey had   "gone to appeal against the severity of the
sentence."    
    Two days after Pompey was sentenced, Nicky Angelo
Carl Hei Hei was sentenced by Mr Justice Robertson in the High
Court at Auckland to a total of five years and three months
jail for a similar offence.  
    On November 24, Hei Hei had driven blind drunk onto
the Auckland Harbour Bridge at peak hour, spun out of control
and hit a car being driven by 23-year-old Anne Fleming.
  She died instantly.   Hei Hei 's wife, Teena Louise
Epiha (22), died the next day.  
    Hei Hei had pleaded guilty to 10 charges before Judge
Avinash Deobhakta in the Auckland District Court on
January 24.   Unlike what happened in Pompey 's case, the
judge declined jurisdiction and sent Hei Hei to the High
Court.  
    Both cases were controversial for another reason.
  Road safety campaigners have been demanding that
manslaughter charges be laid against drink-drive killers.
  The maximum penalty is then life.   Hei Hei was
initially charged with manslaughter but after plea
bargaining he agreed to plead guilty to lesser charges of
causing death while under the influence of alcohol.  
    Three weeks after Pompey and Hei Hei were jailed,
drink-drive killer Dion James Marsh was given seven years, the
longest jail term yet in such circumstances.  
    Marsh had killed 19-year-old Victoria Felton in an
Auckland suburb last year, moments after being booked for
drunk driving.   Inexplicably the traffic officer had let
Marsh keep his keys, enabling him to drive off and hit the car
the young woman was in.   Marsh pleaded guilty to
manslaughter.  
    The sentencing attracted a lot of publicity because
gang members menaced a television crew and members of the
Mothers Against Drunk Drivers group who were protesting
outside the court.  
      Two years   ago, Judge Deobhakta, the
man who dispatched Hei Hei to the High Court to get a longer
sentence, was singled out for unfavourable comment in
  Metro   magazine 's Court Jester section.   He had
sent Russell Henry Appleton to jail for 18 months for
killing a young couple, Paul and Sheryle Burrowes, on an
Auckland motorway.  
      "Although we are quite aware of the ferocity
of public opinion as far as drink-drivers are concerned, on
that occasion I may have made an error of judgement in not
paying due regard to the strong public opinion which has since
been perceived by me,"   says Judge Deobhakta slowly and
carefully, raising the court jester barb during an interview
for this report.  
        "On that occasion the reason I gave that
sentence was I was swayed by strong mitigating factors in
favour of the accused.   With hindsight and the knowledge I
have of the type of sentences which are handed down now, I
may have given him in the region of three years.
    "  When the public think that we are unaware of
public opinion, that is absolutely ludicrous and untrue.
  We are human beings, we read the papers, listen
  photo  
  caption  
to the radio, watch   Holmes   and we are quite
aware that the perception of the public through talkback is
that we are too soft.   I 've yet to come across anyone on
talkback who says we are too hard."      
    A lot of the public criticism in drink-drive cases is
really because of the charges being laid.   Judges only
decide the cases put before them.   It 's not their fault if
the prosecution charges a drunk driver with a lesser offence
than manslaughter, with the resulting lighter penalty.  
    But Judge Deobhakta says the prosecutor can also then
be unfairly criticised.       "I 've been a
prosecutor.   It is not always easy to pick up on one of the
most grievous offences to satisfy public opinion.
  Prosecutors have to make a value judgement whether they
can prove a case beyond reasonable doubt with the witnesses
they have.   If an experienced prosecutor comes to the
view he can not justify a charge of manslaughter, he would be
foolish to go ahead knowing the jury will not bring in a
conviction.
    "  0ne reason the Transport Act was amended for
the new charge of dangerous driving causing death with five
years jail was for the simple reason that, in the past, juries
were most reluctant to bring in a manslaughter verdict.
  Only with the public furore in recent years have jurors
been more ready to accept a verdict of manslaughter.
    "  If public opinion changes, judicial handling
of sentences changes too.   But we are not going to be
browbeaten by some minority lobbyist.   We have a duty to
the community at large.   How are we to know if the ones who
shout the loudest represent public opinion?   That comes
from research, statistics, value judgements.   If I were to
follow the view of every crank who rings Leighton Smith [an
Auckland radio talkback host], I would be totally wrong.
    "  It 's for Parliament to set the law.   If
the public thinks a maximum sentence is inadequate, it 's for
Parliament to change the sentence and say to the courts that
the previous penalty was inadequate."      
    Indeed, Parliament does this from time to time.
  Transport Minister Bill Jeffries has just announced plans
to make a manslaughter charge mandatory when drunk drivers
kill people.   This follows the campaigning by Mothers
Against Drunk Drivers, of which more later.  
      New Zealand   has more than 130 judges
in a distinct hierarchy.   The highest ranked is Chief
Justice Sir Thomas Eichelbaum, followed by the six judges of
the Court of Appeal, the 27 judges of the High Court and the
98 in the district courts.  
    These figures exclude temporary judges and those in
bodies like the Labour Court and the Maori Land Court.  
    The district courts are the busy   "people 's
courts"  .   They deal with all but the most serious
crimes by way of
  photos and captions  
 jury trials as well as a judge sitting alone, and they handle
civil disputes over sums up to $50,000.  
    The High Court tries the most serious crimes like
murder and rape, and handles big civil actions.   The Court
of Appeal deals with appeals from all the lower courts.
  Though the Privy Council in England remains the
ultimate appeal court, few cases go there and its
jurisdiction may soon be abolished.  
    Most judges work very hard for long
  photo  
  caption  
hours and are very well paid.   Sir Thomas Eichelbaum is
paid $175,000 a year plus $7800 in allowances.   Court of
Appeal president Sir Robin Cooke 's salary is $171,500 plus
$6400 allowances.   An ordinary Court of Appeal judge is
paid $162,000 plus $5500 allowances, while a High Court
judge gets $153,500 plus $5500 allowances.   Chief district
court judge Dame Silvia Cartwright is paid $143,000 plus
allowances of $4900, while an ordinary district court
judge gets $123,000 plus $4000 allowances.  
    By comparison the prime minister is paid $156,000 plus
$27,300 allowances, and cabinet ministers get $109,000 plus
allowances of $11,300.  
    Judges have arguably the securest employment
contracts in the country.   They can be removed only for
  "misbehaviour"   or inability to do the job,
and are in effect unsackable.   Their golden
superannuation package will keep them in great comfort in
their retirement, which must be by age 68 but can be earlier
if they wish.  
    Judges pay eight per cent of their salary into the
Government Superannuation Fund.   In return, on
retirement they get a pension of two thirds of their salary.
  They can retire after just 16 years with full pension
rights.   (Although the net pension will be reduced slightly
over the next nine years, in line with recent tax changes
which affect all public servants, judges still get one of the
most generous pensions, state or private, in the country.)  
    Some have retired early to get their super, which is
obviously very important to them.   In April, when the
  judges'   superannuation scheme was under government
threat, Sir Thomas Eichelbaum issued statements to
newspapers and went on radio, a highly unusual move.   Yet
when asked a few days earlier for an interview for this
report he wrote back saying flatly:   "Thank you for the
invitation but I do not wish to contribute to your
article."    
    There are tough judges, soft judges,
middle-of-the-road judges and judges who surprise everyone.
  Look at three judges who sit in the High Court at
Auckland.  
    If you 're convicted of a violent crime in Mr Justice
Sinclair 's courtroom you 're in real trouble.   He doesn't
pussyfoot around with liberal notions of rehabilitating crims.
  He jails them long and hard.  
    On May 19 last year Mr Justice Sinclair showed
judicial ingenuity when he jailed 18-year-old rapist Mark
Anthony Strickland for 15 years, a year longer than the
maximum penalty for the crime.   The judge achieved his
record sentence (three years earlier he 'd sent a budding gang
member away for 13 years for rape) by imposing two cumulative
jail terms, drawing applause from the police and the
law-and-order brigade and outraged howls from the liberals and
university criminologists.  
    The judicial opposite to Mr Justice Sinclair could be
Mr Justice Robertson, the judge whose resignation is most
demanded by National Party hardliner John Banks.  
    In May 1988, Mr Justice Robertson gave Michael
Morrison Herbert Retimana 4 1/2 years for a rape the judge
described as   "hideous"  .   The Crown went to
the Court of Appeal which doubled the sentence.   When he
jailed Maihi Tana in March last year for 6 1/2 years for rape,
the Court of Appeal raised it to nine years.   Some lawyers
suggest Mr Justice Robertson is hardening his attitudes
lately&semi; he was, after all, the judge who gave Hei Hei more
than five years.  
    Ted Thomas QC was a noted liberal and one of the
lawyers who stopped the 1985 All Black Tour of South Africa.
  When he became Mr Justice Thomas a few months ago he
quickly showed that a liberal on one side of the bench does
not necessarily a soft judge make.  
    In his first days on the bench, it was Mr Justice
Thomas who doled out that record seven year sentence for
drink-drive killing to Dion James Marsh.   In another case
he jailed Fale Satu for seven years simply for being a
passenger in a car from which someone else fired shots at
a police car.  
    Judges are part of society but they stand aloof from
it.   They rarely take part in public debate.   Although
an important part of the government process, they must
remain above politics.   The way they are chosen, appointed
and work is a mystery to most people.  
    Auckland University law school professor Bill Hodge
believes the judicial system needs more public scrutiny.
      "If I walked down the street questioning
people, how many could tell me the name of the chief justice?
  You wouldn't get one person in 10 who could tell me it 's
Tom Eichelbaum and nobody would know where he was
born."       He pauses.       "He was born
in Germany.
    "  When there 's an unpopular judicial decision,
nobody knows who to blame.   They just blame the courts
because nobody knows who the judges are.   I think it may be
time to have more public input into the selection of
judges."      
    Though Hodge is an American, he 's not suggesting New
Zealand adopt that country 's system.   Senior United States
judges are direct political appointments and some judges have
to run for office, facing such trials as being dumped by
voters for failing to impose the death penalty, as happened
recently in California.       "But there may be room
for a greater spotlight on the process
here."        
  

      OUR CHANGING FACE: GREYER AND
BROWNER    
      IF YOU SUBSCRIBE   to the Chaos
Theory, you 'll know that the only thing that 's certain is
that nothing is certain.   But there 's no harm in a little
idle speculation.   We can consult Nostradamus, crystal
balls or tarot cards - or we can start with something a
tad more scientific: demography, the study of population.  
      "Demography is of overwhelming
importance,"   says Ian Pool, sociology
professor and director of the Population Study Centre at
Waikato University.     "It drives the rest."  
In   The Business Of Population  , published by the
New Zealand Demographic Society, Pool and several other
demographers look at our future in some detail.   But the
latest word on the subject is   The Human Face Of New
Zealand   by a government committee on population
policy, which looks at our   "changing human
face"  .  
    The most salient features of our changing face?
  Wrinkles and grey hair.  
    Back in the halcyon days of the postwar baby boom, we
had a young, fast-growing population.   There was talk of
reaching four, even five million by the end of the century.
  But since then the birth rate has dropped away, dipping
below the   "replacement level"   of 2.1
births per woman (the theoretical run rate needed for an adult
population to replace itself entirely with another
generation).   By 2014, says   The Human Face  , it is
expected to have dropped again to 1.90 births per woman, so
there will no longer be as many ankle  -  biters coming
through.   Result: both a slowing in population growth and
an ageing population.  
    Our changing face is slightly more likely to be
female than male (about 107 females to every 100 males),
because women live longer on average.   And it will be
browner.  
    In 30   years'   time, nearly a quarter of us will
be of Maori or Pacific Island descent, up from 16 per cent
now.   By 2020 the combined Maori and Pacific Island
Polynesian total, currently around 550,000, looks set to top
the million mark.  
    We will become more multicultural.   With increasing
Asian as well as European and Pacific Island immigration,
intermarriage and "inter-ethnic mobility", we will have a
society - and a city - of more mixed ethnicity: something like
Brazil, Hawaii or Sydney.  
    Our average height - currently around 175 cm for men
and 164 cm for women - could increase slightly.   Overseas
studies have predicted average height increases of as much as
1.5 cm in the next decade, thanks to better nutrition and
improved health enjoyed by younger generations.   After this
though, the growth rate should taper off.  
    Changes in our average weight - 78.6 kilograms for
adult men and 65.4 kilograms for adult women - will depend
more on our eating and exercise habits.   The Hillary
Commission is currently overseeing an extensive "Life In New
Zealand" survey&semi; early results suggest   "there is no
evidence we are getting any thinner"  , according to
Barry Wilson, a senior lecturer in biomechanics at Otago
University.    
    Many of us still drink, smoke and eat too much and
exercise too little.   A recent survey for the Health
Department suggested a third of us are overweight or
obese, a quarter of us smoke, 58 per cent do no regular
exercise and 53 per cent drink at least once a week.  
    Our biggest killers are cardiovascular disease, which
accounts for nearly half of all deaths (coronary heart
disease, 27 per cent of deaths&semi; strokes, 10 per cent&semi; other
heart/circulatory diseases, nine per cent) - and cancer, 22
per cent.   Until we change our eating and exercise habits,
or they find the cure for cancer, we 'll keep dying in the same
old ways.  
    Due to general improvements in nutrition and
health care, though, we are starting to live slightly
longer.   Life expectancy at birth, currently around 71.1
years for men and 77.5 for women, is projected to increase to
76 and 83 for men and women respectively by 2051.  
    Even with net gains of up to 10,000 people a year from
migration, it will take us to between 2004 and 2009 to crack
four million.   The population could grow towards 4.5
million or beyond during the 2020s, but then, with the number
of deaths starting to exceed births, it could well begin to
decline again during the 2030s.   Only with gains of 10,000
or more migrants a year will the population continue to
climb, reaching 4.82 million by 2051.   (The number of
sheep, currently around 60.6 million, should pass 62
million by the turn of the century.)  
    A few more of us won't make a lot of difference,
though.   What will have the biggest effect on our lives and
lifestyles will be changes in the population 's age structure -
the number of people at a certain age at a certain time.
  Demographers call groups of people born in the same
era "cohorts".   They 're the most important ingredient
in the mix.  
    Until recently, says Pool, planning was driven by a
"growth ideology".   The philosophy during the
  '  60s and   '  70s was that we just had to do more
of the same thing - build more maternity hospitals, houses,
prefab classrooms - based on assumptions about baby boom
growth and high immigration.  
    It 's not that simple any more.   In the 1990s and
beyond, growth can no longer be the prime force - the
composition (by age, ethnic and geographical distribution) of
the population must be.  
    From now on the numbers of us in any cohort needing
child care, schools, jobs, hospitals, houses, cars, consumer
goods or pensions and the number available for the work force
at any one time will vary wildly from the previous or
following cohorts - creating headaches for the planners (a
shortage of classrooms one year, a surplus the next) and
having serious effects on our lives.  
      THE AGEING POPULATION   means we can
finally kiss goodbye to the old image of a young, fast-growing
country.   Welcome to New Zealand, the South Pacific 's
most scenic retirement village.   In the next 40 years the
number of aged will double.   By 2031, a quarter - or more
than a million - of us will be 60 or over, by 2051 nearly
a third of us.   By then 8.5 per cent will be over 80 (up
from 2.1 per cent now).   There will be more older women on
their own - because they live longer.  
    With increasing demand for retirement income, national
superannuation - already under threat because the
government says it 's costing too much - will continue to
be a thorny issue.  
    With the work force ageing and declining, there
will be fewer workers to provide for an increasing number of
beneficiaries, and more pressure on people to save for their
own retirement or contribute to private superannuation
schemes.   Many elderly will depend on their families for
support.  
    There will be a rush on rest homes, retirement
villages and granny flats.   Health services - both in
hospitals and in the community - will have to cope with
increasing numbers of frail elderly and terminally ill.
  For example, Alzheimer 's disease afflicts one in every
12 or 13 people over the age of 65, but one in every five or
six over 80, writes Janet Sceats, a medical demographer
with the Waikato Area Health Board, in   The Business Of
Population  .   Other prevalent health problems could
include anything from strokes to rheumatoid arthritis, broken
hips and incontinence.   Sooner or later most families
will be affected, Sceats predicts.  
    "Grey power" will affect all aspects of culture and
society.   Policies such as compulsory retirement at 65 are
likely to end, as more people approach that age in better
health wanting to work longer.   Being "ageist" will
become as much of a no-no as being racist or sexist.  
    In recreation, the trend will be away from high-energy
aerobics and jazzercise to more sedate fitness programmes for
older people.   Look out for lawn bowls and electronic
housie - they could be very big by the roaring
  '  20s.  
    And as the unusually large "bulge" of baby boomers -
which by sheer weight of numbers is the dominant consumer
force - marches through the middle years towards old age, the
social, political and cultural values of the day will change.
  The yuppies of the 1980s who clamoured for cars, mobile
phones, dinners at Cin Cin and FM rock will suddenly prefer to
eat at home and listen to the National Programme.
  Youth culture, which has dominated since the 1950s, will
no longer be fashionable.  
    For many it 's going to be tough.   The squeeze has
already started, says Janet Sceats, but it could really come
on during the next 20 to 30 years as we have to pay for more
and more services traditionally provided by the state -
tertiary education, health, and care of the aged.  
    And because of demographic shifts in the past few
decades (a move from late parenthood in the Depression and war
years to young parenting during the baby boom to today 's
pattern of delayed childbearing), some groups will be hit
much harder than others.  
    While some will have quite prolonged periods when the
dependency burden is low and disposable income high, says
Sceats, for many, caring for elderly parents could immediately
follow child  -  
  box  
rearing.   With the   "cold wind of user pays"  
already blowing through the health, education and social
welfare sectors, she warns, many New Zealanders   "will
barely have time to catch their breath before they start
facing... a retirement without the cushion of national
superannuation"  .  
      FOR OTHERS   - the large numbers of
unemployed, solo parents and other welfare beneficiaries -
it will be tougher still.   More than a quarter of New
Zealand children are now living in households where the
parents depend on social welfare benefits.  
    This welfare group, the underbelly of the baby boom
generation, has disproportionate numbers of Maori and
Pacific Islanders - particularly Maori.  
    Nearly 12 per cent of Maori adults are on the dole&semi;
one in every three Maori of working age and about 45 per cent
of Maori families are currently dependent on some kind of
benefit or accident compensation.   Maori are twice as
likely to be in solo parent families as Pakeha.   A recent
report on income maintenance suggested that a plan to cut
welfare benefits for single people living with others would
make one in every four Maori adults worse off.  
    With the lethal mix of unemployment, lower educational
achievement, teenage childbearing and solo parenthood, many
Maori could become entrenched into what academics call
  "multi-generation benefit dependency"  .  
    A vicious circle of unemployment, poverty and cultural
alienation could also lead to more crime, more young
offenders, more pressure on the penal system.  
      "When you enlarge the dispossessed and
unemployable class, the inevitable accompaniment is bigger
jails,"   says Auckland University political studies
lecturer Joe Atkinson.  
    Even if job prospects improve, the problem won't
go away.   Those disadvantaged now are likely to remain
disadvantaged.   Many of the long-term unemployed will
be Maori or Pacific Islanders, people with manual skills and
those who left school with no qualifications.   The problem,
notes Jacques Poot, a senior lecturer in economics at
Victoria University, in   The Business Of
Population  , is that manual jobs are getting scarcer
through the growth of the services sector and
technological change.  
    Unless these people, and the young (15 to 30-year-old)
unemployed Maori adults in particular, are "reskilled",
they could be outside the labour force for 40 years, warns
Pool.       "Unless they 're retrained, employed and
adequately housed, they 'll pass through life lacking not only
the skills and equity of their peers, but also of cohorts
ahead and behind them."      
    Auckland medical sociologist Peter Davis puts the
situation even more plainly:   "If the problems
facing the young and disadvantaged are not tackled soon, we 'll
end up with an underclass."    
    Maori will also be affected by   "massive shifts
in age composition"   due to a rapid decline in their
birth rate in the 1970s, say Pool and his colleague Nicholas
Pole, a senior research officer at the Ministry of Education,
in a New Zealand Demographic Society paper   The Maori
Population to 2011  .   There will be fewer young
Maori, but a bulge in late middle age and a tripling in the
numbers of elderly by 2011 - with corresponding increases in
health and welfare needs.  
    And the dilution of the ethnic group through
intermarriage and people changing their ethnic identity
could lead to possible problems of   "cultural
maintenance"   - particularly with regard to things like
kohanga reo and kura kaupapa Maori in schools.  
    The Treaty of Waitangi will continue to be the central
focus for Maori grievances, claims and aspirations during the
1990s.   Naida Pou, chairperson of the Auckland District
Maori Council, claims that   "the treaty is the only
thing that 's going to save us.     We 've the highest
numbers of at-risk people in the area of health, the highest
clientele in the prisons per head of population, the
highest numbers of dropouts from the education system and the
highest unemployed.   When are the other treaty partners
going to wake up to the fact that they 're
responsible?  "    
    Pacific Islanders, too, are worried.   Says Arthur
Anae, a Samoan businessman and entrepreneur:   "The rot
has already set in.     Most of our people are factory
floor people or freezing workers.   The government has
just put them into dole queues.   Our people are becoming
bludgers through no fault of their own.   Our kids are
coming out of school with nowhere to go.  "    
    Henny Fa'asalele, director of the Tagata Pasifika
Resources Development Trust, which runs Access programmes for
Pacific Islanders, admits that   "the future doesn't
seem particularly secure"  .  
    Nevertheless, both remain optimistic.   They believe
most Pacific Island immigrants are determined to succeed&semi;
that many will continue to do well in the professions,
business and government departments&semi; and that the strength
of the extended family and the community will preserve Pacific
Island languages and culture here.  
    Says Fa'asalele:   "We need to wean our people
off social welfare dependency.     We 're already starting
to see more community initiatives and Pacific Island
families moving into businesses traditionally run by
Europeans.   As long as a sense of family and community
remains, we 'll continue to aspire to great
things.  "    
      "By the year 2000, Pacific Island people will
be playing a very strong role in city councils and hopefully
in government,"   predicts Anae.  
      THE SHAPE   of the work force is
changing.   The number of working women is steadily
increasing - women already make up more than 70 per cent of
part-time workers and 35 per cent of full-timers, and could
soon outnumber men in part-time and full-time work
combined.  
    More women will take up careers in the professions and
more men will become involved in caring for children and
the elderly, says Janet Sceats.   There will be more
dual-career as well as dual-income families.   The trend
towards delayed parenthood will continue (last year 30 per
cent of births were to women aged between 30 and 39), and
instead of abandoning careers once they become mothers,
women will be more likely to return to work and spend some of
their pay on child care.  
    At the same time the work force will be ageing and
declining.   A big drop in the number of work-force entrants
will mean less pressure on employment but could have serious
effects on promotion opportunities, rejuvenation of the
work force and recruitment, and possibly, says Jacques
Poot, on innovation and progress in industry.  
    The sort of work we 'll be doing will change too.
  We 're still a trading nation - approximately one third of
our employment is related to the export or import of goods
and services - and we need to keep selling our goods and
services to highly competitive world markets, write Lesley
Haines and Paul Callister in the New Zealand Planning
Council 's   Tomorrow 's Skills  .   But those goods and
services, and those markets, are changing.  
    We 're moving more and more into an "information and
knowledge-based" society.   The sunrise industries are in
the service sector, providing "non-physical" goods and
services - tourism, communications, business services like
advertising, market research and design, and community
services such as health care and education.  
    While agriculture, manufacturing, and mining and fuels
accounted for 70 per cent of the value of our international
trade in 1988, by 2088 the service sector will make up nearly
two thirds, and the rest only 35 per cent.  
    The Planning Council forecasts a slow return to
economic growth in the early 1990s, with increasing exports.
  Some of it will be in the manufacturing and primary
sectors, but the service sector will lead the way.  
      The hot areas are business services and finance,
wholesale and retail trade, and the hospitality industry.
  The fastest growing occupations are managers,
statisticians, systems analysts, professional and
technical staff, economists and administrators&semi; while the
largest loss of jobs will be been among labourers and
construction workers.  
    The Planning Council predicts that by the end of the
century 70 per cent of jobs will be in the service sector, and
over 70 per cent of   all   jobs, in every sector, will
be non-manual.  
    Things we 'll need more of: communication and
language skills&semi; information, technology, number and
computer skills in the business and finance areas.
  Especially computer skills: the computer will become
indispensable everywhere - in shops, restaurants and every
sort of business.   Even in the home.  
    Haines and Callister predict higher levels of
self-employment and more small businesses.   So we 'll need
more entrepreneurial attitudes backed up by business and
management skills.  
    Just around the corner are increases in job-sharing,
temporary or contract work, more flexible hours, working two
part-time jobs instead of one full-time, and more people
working from home.  
    As is the four-day working week.   All those in
favour?  
      WE'RE STARTING   to wise up to some
new markets for our trade.   With globalisation of the
economy and industries operating on a worldwide basis, New
Zealand will have to do its best to fit in, says Auckland
University economics lecturer Robert Scollay.  
    With 3.38 million people we 're   "a small splash
in a large bucket"  , writes Warwick Neville, associate
professor of geography at Auckland University, in   The
Business Of Population  .   The world 's population
reached five billion in 1988 and is currently growing by
some 90 million people a year.   Most of the growth is in
the African, South American and Asian countries whose share of
the world 's population is pushing 80 per cent, and they are
producing a huge expanding adult population - and rapidly
expanding markets.  
    So as well as traditional trading partners like the
UK, and the Pacific rim countries of Australia, the US and
Japan (which will dominate the Pacific and be our most
important partner), rapidly growing Asian economies such
as Thailand will become increasingly important as markets and
sources of tourists, immigrants and investors.  
    Exporting to Europe and North America is hamstrung by
access restrictions, but those markets still offer
tremendous potential, says Wayne Cartwright, director of
the Graduate School of Business at Auckland University.
  The "triad" philosophy says that the USA, Japan and Europe
will be the big three - and once a united Europe gets going,
no power in the world will be able to stop it.  
    Following CER, inevitably there will be closer ties
with Australia.   The next step is economic union: there
have been calls for our tax laws to be harmonised, even for
the New Zealand and the Australian dollar to be made one
and the same.   The final step would be political union.  
      "Emotionally we say 'no way',"   says
Scollay.     "But logically, there are already a lot
of developments pointing in that direction.   It could be
seriously discussed in the next 10 or 20 years."    
    Adds Cartwright:   "The issue isn't
ourselves versus Australia but how are New Zealand and
Australia going to compete with the wealthy triad forces of
Europe, the USA and Japan?   There may be no option but
to get together just to survive."    
      TO BE INTERNATIONALLY   competitive in
anything, however, we first have to lift our base skills.
  We 're falling behind other countries in basic
communication, reasoning and number skills, say Haines and
Callister.  
    Compared to European countries, our school leavers are
not getting enough trade, technical or professional training.
  Nearly half our work force has no formal school
qualification, and 60 per cent has no tertiary
qualification.  
    Our youths leave the education system earlier than
those of other countries: of the OECD countries, only Greece
and Turkey have a smaller proportion in school at the age of
16.   And we have only half the level of participation in
tertiary education that the Canadian state of Ontario has,
for example.  
      "Compared with other developed countries we 've
failed miserably to keep our kids at secondary school and get
them into tertiary education.   In terms of the
technological needs of the 1990s we 're just not in a position
to be internationally competitive,"   says Ian Pool.  
      "Our current work force is ill-equipped for
the challenges of the new economy,"   add Haines and
Callister.  
    Pool warns:   "The European Community, North
America, Australia and parts of Asia could attract our young
skilled people.   How can New Zealand hope to compete
against the big players?   Our young people who are highly
skilled will do what young people who are highly skilled
always do - go overseas."   A lack of skilled people and
an ageing labour force are among the strong arguments
advanced for increasing immigration.   Business
heavyweights such as the Round Table and the Top Tier group
have long aired the view that a population of 3.38 million is
simply too small for any significant growth, and that we
should open the gates and pump up the population to five
million or more to get things moving.  
    The downside is that more immigrants would put serious
pressure on a labour market in which there is high
unemployment, on the environment, and on
  photo   
demand for services such as housing, health and education.  
    The government 's latest plan is to aim for a net gain
of 10,000 highly skilled people a year (rather than last
year 's net loss of over 6500) using a points system which will
weigh up potential   immigrants'   educational, trade and
work qualifications, family links, age, ability to settle
successfully here and command of English.   Where we used to
favour mainly European, particularly British, immigrants,
we are likely to see a lot more arrivals from South East
Asia.  
    There is a problem with this idea of
  "instant migration"  , says Pool.   It
assumes recruitment can be done quickly and competently.
  But in Hong Kong, for example, Canada and Australia are
recruiting much more efficiently and our immigration
procedures are amateurish by comparison.  
    It also assumes people are waiting to come here.
  That may not be true, says Pool, given that by the
mid-1990s there will be a shortage of young skilled workers
right across the developed countries.  
    Says Richard Bedford, professor of geography at
Waikato University:   "We 're a small country, with a
small economy, a long way from anywhere.   More Asians
choose to go to Canada and Australia... probably because they
believe there 's more opportunity in the larger industrial
economies."    
    And while bringing in immigrants could benefit the
main centres, particularly Auckland, says Bedford, it
won't necessarily do anything for the provinces or rural
areas.  
      "Just as many New Zealanders have drifted
north, most migrants will want to come to Auckland -
particularly the highly skilled, moneyed ones.   It 's
unrealistic to say that international migration will
have much effect on Southland or the West Coast.   If New
Zealanders are migrating out of those places, why should
overseas immigrants be attracted to them?"    
    A population of five or six million would double
Auckland 's population, says Bedford, and mean a shift to a
different style of city living from low density housing to
high rise.     "Do Aucklanders want that sort of
city?"   he asks.     "What about your way of
life, your environment?"       