   Longevity and Infirmity: An Inevitable Relationship?  

  V.J. KNOX AND W.L. GEKOSKI 

   The number of elderly people in our society is increasing.  This is, of course, a result of population growth.  The proportion of our population that is elderly is also increasing, both because of declines in the birth rate and because of increased life expectancy.  Demographers do not agree on the exact details of the shifts in the age composition of our population and disagree even more strongly regarding when and if the current trends will abate.  However, no matter which demographic calculations are used it is clear that, at least for the next 50 years, the proportion of elderly individuals in our society will be increasing (Chappell, Strain, and Blandford). 

   These demographic projections have given rise to a variety of dire predictions.  It has been suggested that, as a result of longer life expectancy and dramatic improvement in life-extending technologies, elderly people of the future will experience longer periods of infirmity before death than today's elderly people (Gruenberg; Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  The suggestion that the price we will pay for longer life expectancy is a longer period of infirmity before death strikes dread to most hearts.  The constellation of loss of independence, being a burden on others, and pain or suffering for an extended period seems a high price for a few extra years of life.  Indeed, the greatest fear of elderly people is not death or poverty or loneliness, but incapacity (Harris). 

   Also derived from demographic projections is the suggestion that health care costs will sky-rocket because resources are disproportionately expended for care of chronically ill elderly people (Schulz).  In addition, because both increased health care and pension costs will have to be borne by a proportionately smaller number of workers, the financial burden of the elderly population will contribute to intergenerational conflict over expenditure of available resources (Neugarten; Tindale and Marshall).  Indeed, Callahan (1986) has argued that we will approach the point where the only sensible decision on the societal level will be to terminate expensive health care practices for elderly individuals in favour of directing virtually all health care resources to younger more productive (or potentially productive) individuals.  Debates on the ethics of such a position have already begun (Summerville). 

   An Alternative View: The Compression of Morbidity Hypothesis  

   Some experts take issue with the bleak scenario of longer periods of infirmity occurring as average life expectancy increases and propose a very different view (Fries; Maddox).  Most controversial among these is James Fries, who, in a 1981 book, Vitality and Aging (with Lawrence Crapo), proposed that as more people live to old age they can live less of their old age with a serious infirmity.  This has been labelled the "compression of morbidity" hypothesis.  ("Morbidity" refers to the presence of disease, "infirmity" to the debilitating effects of disease.  In writing about his hypothesis, Fries uses the terms morbidity, infirmity, and disease interchangeably, and in this respect we have followed his lead.) 

   The compression of morbidity hypothesis is stated in terms of two premises: that the maximum human life span is fixed at about 115 years and that with increased use of techniques of prevention and intervention the age at which infirmity first occurs will increase.  Taken together these two premises lead to the conclusion that the duration of infirmity will decrease.  Although the basic idea has been around for some time (Pearl), Fries is currently its most ardent and articulate proponent.  If the compression of morbidity hypothesis is correct, its implications are far-reaching, both to individuals and to society.  In this paper we will elaborate the hypothesis, evaluate criticisms of it, and discuss the implications both of accepting and rejecting it.  Let us consider each of its premises in turn. 

   Maximum Human Life Span is Fixed at 115 Years  

   This premise has two components, one specifying that the maximum life span is fixed and the other specifying the particular age at which it is fixed.  These two components differ both in terms of their contentiousness and in terms of the availability of supporting evidence. 

   Before proceeding, it is helpful to differentiate among average life expectancy (the statistically determined age to which an individual born at a particular time, in a particular place, is likely to live), normal life span (the age to which the average human would live if environmental conditions were optimal), and maximum life span (the maximum age to which an individual human being living under optimal environmental conditions could possibly live).  At the present time, average life expectancy in the developed countries is approaching 80 years for women and is only 5 - 7 years less for men (Myers and Manton).  According to Fries the normal human life span is about 85 years and the maximum human life span is about 115 years. 

   Inherent in the concepts of a normal and a fixed maximum life span is the notion that there is such a thing as a normal process of aging.  Although not taking a strong position regarding the specifics, Fries holds that such a process is probably genetically controlled and determines that as we age: 1) the capacity of each of the body's organs to function declines; 2) because the body is composed of multiple organ systems, each of which is declining, there is an exponentially increasing probability that one of the systems will fail; 3) because the homeostatic processes of the body are very finely tuned and easily disrupted, as organ systems deteriorate, the ability of the body to recover from disruption lessens.  Thus, in old age, as a result of the normal process of aging and in the absence of pathology, the stage is set for death to occur reasonably quickly, as a result of what would have been a minor disruption earlier in life - for example, pneumonia, a minor infection, or a drug interaction effect.  From this perspective the normal process of aging will lead to death if some pathological process does not do so first. 

   Most experts in the area of biological gerontology hold either that the body's cells and/or organs break down from regular use (i.e., in the absence of pathology), or that there are intrinsic genetic factors which regulate, somehow, such breakdowns (Sacher).  Despite much debate on the precise nature of the process controlling normal aging, there is widespread agreement that such a process exists and defines some upper limit on the human life span (Perlmutter and Hall).  This is consistent with the fact that all other species seem to have a fixed maximum life span.  The majority position has not, however, gone unchallenged.  Because the biological changes that occur with increasing age involve decline and deterioration, it is extremely difficult to determine whether particular declines are the result of pathological processes or of intrinsic factors.  Indeed, some argue that there may be no such thing as normal aging, that all changes are the result of pathology (Walford).  It follows from such a position that if the lethal chronic diseases afflicting humans could be eliminated, life could continue indefinitely. 

   Although most biological gerontologists agree that there are normal processes of aging and that a fixed maximum life span must follow, there is substantially less agreement about what this maximum might be (Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  Many do not see the question as particularly urgent or important.  It is, however, a point crucial to Fries's position.  For Fries to argue that compression of morbidity can be achieved in a foreseeable time frame requires that maximum life span be not very far from the currently documented maximum age of about 115 years.  As he notes, although the proportion of individuals living to close to this apparent maximum has steadily increased from 1900 to 1980, there is no evidence to indicate that the maximum itself has shifted during this period.  The fact that average life expectancy has increased but maximum life span has not is reflected in the increasing "rectangularization" of survival curves (the percentage of individuals surviving to a given age in a given year) that has occurred during this century.  This rectangularization can be seen in Figure 1. 

  

   Among the additional arguments Fries cites in favour of the fixed maximum human life span being about 115 years are: that despite many claims to extremely long life, the oldest individual whose age was documented (up to 1981 when the Fries and Crapo book was published) was a Canadian who died at age 113 years, 124 days; that maximum life span for mammalian species may be predicted by brain size / body weight ratio; and that there has been no evidence of change in the maximum human life span over the past 100,000 years.  Let us turn now to examine the second premise of Fries's position. 

   Age at First Infirmity Will Increase  

   A model developed by the scientific advisory group of the World Health Organization (WHO) is useful in conceptualizing the relationship between health and longevity.  This model distinguishes among morbidity-free life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and total life expectancy.  In the typical case there is some period of time between onset of morbidity and onset of disability, and between onset of disability and death.  The length of these two periods varies as a function of age of onset of morbidity and cause of morbidity.  Thus, in the case of relatively rapidly-lethal diseases (e.g., coronary heart disease, stroke, cancer) both the periods of disability-free morbidity and of disability preceding death tend to be relatively short (perhaps only two or three years each), whereas for degenerative diseases (e.g., osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, senile dementia) each period can be much longer (perhaps as long as 15 years).  For different causes of morbidity the length of time in each period will differ somewhat as a function of age of onset of morbidity. 

   The current thinking is that as average life expectancy converges on normal life expectancy for the species more individuals are likely to develop at least one chronic disease (e.g., coronary heart disease, atherosclerosis, respiratory disease, cancer, osteoporosis, senile dementia, diabetes, etc.) that progresses to the point that he or she will experience a long period of increasing incapacity (Schneider and Brody; Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  Fries argues, however, that it is possible to postpone the onset of the common chronic diseases by a variety of measures, mostly preventive and mostly involving aspects of life-style such as weight control, nutrition, exercise, stress management, elimination of smoking, control of salt intake, moderation in consumption of alcohol, etc.  Timely and appropriate application of such measures would allow most individuals to remain vital into old age and postpone the onset of chronic disease, so that most would die as a result of the normal process of aging before becoming seriously incapacitated by a chronic disease. 

   Argument and Counter-Argument  

   Fries's compression of morbidity hypothesis has attracted an enormous amount of attention and controversy.  There have been countless scholarly and not so scholarly articles criticizing, supporting, or otherwise commenting on his formulation.  Among gerontologists few issues have generated as much controversy in the past 20 or 30 years.  The responses have been varied.  Some have seemed motivated by an intensely personal, emotion-laden desire to believe that the life span is not finite or at least that it is longer than Fries's 115 years.  Such a desire may be fuelled by fears of death, wishes for immortality, or other aspects of individual psychodynamics.  Most responses, however, have been of one of two sorts: criticisms of Fries's interpretation of the data presented to support the compression of morbidity hypothesis, or warnings regarding the implications of accepting the compression of morbidity hypothesis.  We shall deal with these in turn. 

   Criticism of the compression of morbidity hypothesis is directed either to the premise of a fixed maximum life span of about 115 years or to the possibility of delaying the onset of chronic disease.  Given the reasonably compelling evidence across species that the maximum life span is fixed and that in humans it is in the vicinity of 115 years, we find it surprising that most criticism focuses on whether the maximum life span is 115 years, rather than the seemingly more problematic suggestion that prevention programmes can succeed in altering life-styles to the degree necessary to significantly delay the onset of chronic disease. 
 </I

   Chapter 2 
   THE PHYSICAL BASE  

   Arctic and Subarctic Environments  

   Across the northern half of North America, there are two natural regions - the Arctic and the Subarctic.  Climate has played a key role in forming these two biomes.  The arctic climate, for instance, is associated with a particular type of natural vegetation, soils, and biological life.  All these natural features are interrelated.  Their natural vegetation provides the most visible spatial pattern (Figure 2.1).  These same natural regions form the cultural homelands of the Inuit and Indian peoples. 

   The common denominator found in both regions, but particularly in the Arctic, is the presence of a cold environment, which results in slow growth of biological life, natural vegetation, and soil formation.  Because of the polar climate, the presence of permafrost, cold ocean bodies, and the chilling effect of the Labrador current, only the continental areas of the Subarctic experience warm weather for any length of time.  Besides being a cold environment, most of the North receives so little precipitation that it is termed a cold desert.  These two factors, low temperatures and low precipitation, make the North among the least productive biological areas of the world (Figure 2.2).  At the same time, such a slow rate of plant and biological life means that the natural environment is slow to recover from natural or anthropogenic damage.  The fragile nature of the polar environments is indicated by the relationship of temperature and precipitation to plant growth (Figure 2.2). 

   The Arctic has the coldest environment in Canada.  It lies north of the treeline, found primarily in the Northwest Territories but also in Quebec, Newfoundland, Ontario, Yukon, and Manitoba.  It is characterized by a very cold climate where the warmest month has a mean monthly temperature of less than 10C.  Under such climatic conditions, normal tree growth is not possible and a tundra vegetation is formed.  True zonal soils are not found in the Arctic.  In many places, rock and unconsolidated gravels and sands form the ground surface.  Where thin soils have formed in the continuous permafrost zone, they are often classified as cryosols (soils which have an active or thawed layer of less than one metre in depth).  Under these conditions, soil-forming processes work extremely slowly because soil temperatures are often just above the freezing point.  Even when summer air temperatures thaw the top few centimetres of the ground, the presence of permafrost beneath this thin active layer acts not only as a cooling agent but also as a barrier to water. 

   Arctic vegetation is often divided into two zones - Low Arctic and High Arctic.  The Low Arctic occupies the mainland while the High Arctic is found in parts of Keewatin and the Arctic Archipelago.  The Low Arctic zone is characterized by nearly complete plant cover, including many shrubs, sedges, and scrub trees such as birch and willow.  Tussock sedge and low tundra shrubs are the summer grazing of barren ground caribou, which are still a major source of food for Native people.  Heath, herbs, and lichen are the typical plants.  While trees such as willows do grow, they reach a height of only a few centimetres. 

   In the High Arctic zone, freezing temperatures occur almost daily and permafrost is present near the surface throughout the year so that even tundra vegetation growth is inhibited.  Periglacial features - bare rock and a variety of unconsolidated materials - are commonly found.  Such barren arctic lowlands are called polar deserts (Vignette 2.1). 

   Vignette 2.1 Polar Desert  

   The term 'polar desert' usually describes barren areas of bare rock, shattered bedrock, and sterile gravel.  These conditions are essentially an extreme form of fell field, with vegetation cover, at least of higher plants, reduced to near zero.  Actually, this initial impression of barrenness is usually inaccurate.  It is hard to find a square metre of polar desert that has no form of vegetation growing on it.  By far the most important group of plants here are the lichens. 

   Lichens (pronounced like '-unz) are the foot soldiers or unsung heroes of the tundra environment.  Lichens are in a sense a group of primitive plants, although it is more correct to think of them as a colony or association of two kinds of plants living together.  The main body of a lichen is called a thallus; it consists of a dense, tangled mass of threadlike fungal material.  This fungal matrix varies greatly in shape from one kind of lichen to another, but each kind has a characteristic form by which it can usually be identified.  Encapsulated with the fungal strands are quantities of single-celled algae.  These tiny green plants supply the colony with nutrients. 

   SOURCE Young 1989: 198.  

   The treeline often serves as the boundary between the Arctic and the Subarctic.  Ecologically, the treeline represents a major 'break' between the two regions, though in fact the 'break' is a gradual one consisting of a wooded tundra (Vignette 2.2). 

   Vignette 2.2 The Treeline  

   The treeline represents a dividing zone between the Arctic and Subarctic regions.  It closely corresponds to the 10C monthly mean temperature for July.  Other natural factors, such as the depth of the active layer of permafrost, protection from wind, south slope radiation, and well drained land, may result in patches of trees growing north of this isotherm, or conversely, tundra occurring south of it.  Then too, weather varies from year to year, causing the annual position of the isotherm to fluctuate somewhat.  During the relatively warm decade of the 1980s, for instance, summer temperatures were much higher in high latitudes than in most previous decades.  All of these factors have produced a transition zone of wooded tundra between the Arctic and Subarctic regions. 

   Three centres close to this imaginary line are Aklavik (6812'N), Churchill (5848'N), and Cartwright (5336'N).  Aklavik, located on a deltaic island at the mouth of the Mackenzie River, has a warmest-month average mean temperature of 14C; Churchill, situated near the shore of Hudson Bay, has an average July temperature of 11.8C; and Cartwright, lying along the Labrador Coast, has a mean July figure of 12.  About 250 km inland from the coast, temperatures are much higher and, at Happy Valley-Goose Bay, the mean July temperature is 15.8.  The continental effect of this large land mass coupled with the summer cooling caused by the ocean waters of Hudson Bay have resulted in a north-west to south-east trend to the 'treeline'.  

  The proportion of tundra to forest varies but, toward the Arctic zone, only a few stunted trees are found in the more protected areas of river valleys.  Spruce and larch are the predominant species found in the wooded tundra.  This transition zone also represents a biological and cultural boundary.  Many subarctic animals, including the beaver and moose, are not found in the Arctic and of the aboriginal peoples only the Inuit developed the technology permitting year-round life in the Arctic. 

   The Subarctic, the largest natural region in North America, is covered by the boreal forest in a continuous belt from Newfoundland to the Rocky Mountains.  Its summers are short but warm, allowing for a much richer vegetation cover than that found in the Arctic.  Coniferous trees predominate.  Variation in this forest allows for the identification of four subzones: wooded tundra, lichen woodland, closed boreal forest, and forest park-land.  The wooded tundra forms the transition zone beyond which lies the tundra.  Patches of spruce and larch are found in sheltered, low-lying areas while high, more exposed lands are treeless.  The lichen woodland is a savannah-like area consisting of a thick groundcover of lichens interspersed with stands of spruce and pine.  The closed boreal forest, a dense forest of fir, spruce, and pine, is found in southern Yukon, a small part of the Northwest Territories (principally the upper Mackenzie Valley), and the seven provinces.  Within this zone, the forest cover, is broken by a variety of wetlands including muskeg and peat bogs.  In this wet environment, black spruce and larch are the most common species.  On the better drained land, species of spruce, fir, pine, and larch are common along with stands of poplar and birch.  Towards its southern limits, broad-leaf trees, particularly aspen and birch, are found.  The forest parkland, a narrow transition area adjacent to the Canadian Prairies, is a combination of forest and mid-latitude grasslands.  Small bushes, including blueberries, and grasses form the floor cover. 

   Infertile podzolic soils are common in the Subarctic.  These thin, acidic soils are best formed under cool, wet growing conditions where the principal vegetative litter is derived from a coniferous forest.  A low evaporation rate, immature drainage, and permafrost ensure an excess of ground moisture, resulting in severely leached soils and the widespread occurrence of marsh and bogs.  In spite of these environmental handicaps, soil formation is much more active in the Subarctic than it is in the Arctic.  One reason is that the longer summer temperatures allow the ground to thaw to a depth of several metres, promoting biological activity and chemical action.  Another is that the vegetation cover is much denser in the Subarctic than in the Arctic, thus providing much more plant litter for soil formation. 

   Subarctic lakes and forests provide an attractive environment for many animals and wildfowl.  Unlike animals in the Arctic, wildlife in the Subarctic often hibernates during the winter months.  Within this forested biome, a wide variety of animals make their home, including the beaver, moose, and grouse.  The abundance of lakes, marsh, and muskeg provides a favourable habitat for many waterfowl and big game animals such as moose which graze on shoreline vegetation.  In the winter, caribou herds migrate from the Arctic into the northern forest. 

   Polar Climate  

   The cold nature of the North has shaped the vegetation, soils, and biological life found in Arctic and Subarctic.  This cold environment - the polar climate - results primarily from low receipts of solar energy.  It is this limited solar energy entering the northern hemisphere which creates the two types of polar climate: the arctic and the subarctic. 

   Polar climates lie in high latitudes.  They are characterized by low levels of solar energy and precipitation.  On average, the earth's poles receive 40% less radiation than the equator (Lawford 1988: 144).  At the Arctic Circle, solar radiation is reduced to zero for one day and, at higher latitudes, for longer periods of times, reaching six months at the North Pole.  Such low levels of radiation result in continuous cooling of the land and the build-up of masses of frigid arctic air which are associated with daily high temperatures of - 40C or lower.  These frigid arctic air masses often surge southwards, causing blizzard conditions in the Canadian Prairies, subzero temperatures in eastern Canada and freezing temperatures in the southern United States.  In the spring, solar radiation increases but, because of the reflective snow-cover, much of its effect is lost, with up to 80% of the solar radiation being reflected.  Until the snow cover melts, the breaking of winter's grip is slowed.  Once the snow is gone, temperatures recover rapidly and the ensuing warm weather quickly melts the ice from lakes, rivers, and the sea coast.  By early July, sea ice has disappeared from Hudson Bay and, a few weeks later, from along the edge of the arctic sea coast.  Polar Pack Ice, of course, continues to occupy most of the Arctic Ocean.  During the short summer, massive amounts of solar radiation reach the northern lands and waters.  With long daylight hours, the landscape warms and plants quickly appear and flower.  Daily summer temperatures in the Mackenzie Valley and southern Yukon can reach into the low 30C.  By September, however, cooling begins and winter soon regains its grip on the polar lands and waters. 
 
   The seasonal pattern of air temperatures is illustrated in Figure 2.3.  The winter regime is shown by the mean daily temperature for January, demonstrating its cold continental nature.  The coldest January temperatures are found in two places - the north end of Ellesmere and Axel Heiberg islands and just south of Boothia Peninsula.  On the other hand, the mean daily temperature for July demonstrates both the warming effect of the northern land mass and the cooling effect of the Arctic Ocean (both open water and permanent ice pack), Hudson Bay, and the Labrador Current.  There is a marked northwest to southeast trend in the July isotherms with a warm 'corridor' extending down the Mackenzie Valley. 

   Precipitation in the North is generally light with the least amount falling in the Arctic (Figure 2.4).  The main reasons are the inability of cold air to absorb moisture and the existence of ice on northern lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Arctic Ocean for much of the year.  For these reasons, it is not surprising that the lowest annual precipitation occurs in the ice-locked islands situated in the Arctic Archipelago.  Victoria Island, for example, has such scant rain and snowfall (often less than 140 mm annually) that it is described as an 'arctic desert'.  Resolute Bay, which is located just 16 south of the North Pole, receives less than 140 mm per year.  Further south, at the northern edge of the Subarctic, precipitation is heavier.  At Yellowknife, the annual precipitation is around 250 mm.  The Subarctic, on the other hand, generally receives more precipitation, usually over 300 mm annually.  Precipitation does vary, however.  A few areas do receive much greater precipitation.  The greatest amount of precipitation occurs in the Cordillera and along the Atlantic coast.  In these two areas, the high terrain results in orographic precipitation (rain or snow caused when warm, moisture-laden air is forced to rise over hills or mountains and is cooled in the process).  The south coast of Baffin Island receives around 400 mm annually while the figures for the southern coast of Labrador and the mid-North of Quebec exceed 800 mm.  Most precipitation falls as snow.  In the spring, rivers and streams are swollen by melting snow and ice.  Some communities along the Mackenizie River are subject to spring flooding.  Fort Simpson, situated on an island at the confluence of the Liard and Mackenzie Rivers, has been inundated a number of times, and Aklavik, located in the delta of the Mackenzie River, is threatened by spring flood waters almost every year.  The occurrence of spring flooding at Aklavik is so regular that, in the late 1950s, the federal government decided to create the new town of Inuvik rather than expand the community of Aklavik. 

   In addition to the Arctic and Subarctic climatic types, most climatic maps also depict a Cordillera climate, a composite of several climates.  In this text, the mountainous area of northern British Columbia, Yukon, and Northwest Territories is treated as part of the Subarctic.  Elevation and topography have important roles in determining the nature of the Cordillera climate.  Another climatic type found in the North, the Ice Cap climate, is associated with large glaciers, ice caps, and icefields, and has a mean temperature below freezing for all months.  Figure 2.1 shows the distribution of arctic and subarctic climate types.  
 </I

    Biotechnology: Managing the Revolution in Evolution  

  BEPPI CROSARIOL 

   Americans may best remember 1973 for the night their president appeared on television to accept responsibility for the Watergate scandal.  Canadians may recall it as the year world oil prices quadrupled in response to declining production by members of the OPEC cartel.  Still others may recollect it most vividly for the event that precipitated that embargo, the outbreak of war in the Middle East.  In time, though, much of the world may come to remember it best for two relatively uncelebrated men, Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen, and a nameless grey toad.  That year, in a relatively short and characteristically undramatic article in the scientific press, the California researchers described an experiment in which they had stitched together a DNA molecule from parts of two distinct species - a toad and a bacterium - and inserted it into a living bacterial cell.  Though hardly a classic scene of impending revolution, their experiment marked the beginning of a fundamental shift in humanity's relationship to the organic world.  Boyer and Cohen had become the first people to engineer an entirely novel form of life. 

   Though the public could not have been expected to fathom it then - and indeed has yet to appreciate it fully - the pair's cryptic account placed at technology's disposal the basic mechanism of heredity.  Humans had taken control of the molecular code that commands biological growth and regeneration, and with that achievement has come the potential to combat some of the world's most pressing problems.  The products of so-called genetic engineering - hardier and higher yielding crops, more productive livestock, new vaccines, organisms that extract oil and minerals from the earth, and bugs that gobble waste - promise deliverance from hunger, disease, environmental decay, and declining energy resources.  Not to mention relief from a host of more benign aggravations: soon we may produce vegetables that ripen on the vine without going soft, coffee plants with naturally decaffeinated beans, and "super pigs" that yield low-fat pork. 

   Yet along with the hopeful prospects, the Boyer-Cohen experiment also succeeded in bringing to the forefront a litany of profound questions about the risks of applying this new technique to humans and the environment.  While the chemical industry began to dream of crops with greater resistance to herbicides and pesticides, some consumers began to challenge the scant knowledge available about the toxicity of these chemicals.  While other consumers began dreaming of flawless fruits and vegetables, some farmers began to wonder about the ability of uniform crops to withstand genetic diseases.  While other farmers dreamed of microbial treatments to protect seedlings against frost and drought, doctors began to wonder about the accidental spread of experimentally concocted microbes to more vulnerable habitats and about their effects on human health.  While others in the medical community dreamed of curing hereditary deficiencies in humans, social scientists and theologians began to wonder about the propriety of "playing God."  Although these unsettling questions had been suggested by earlier genetic research, it wasn't until 1973 that dealing with them became a critical exercise.  The sudden urgency with which they had come to be asked also confirmed that Boyer and Cohen had, at the very least, given birth not only to a new form of life but to a major technological revolution. 

   Less than two decades later, the revolution known as biotechnology has taken concrete shape around the world.  Researchers at government, university, and private laboratories are now working at a feverish pace to develop new products for industrial and household consumption - a pace that is understandably leaving legislators and regulators far behind.  In biotechnology, Canada stands with a handful of countries at the vanguard of promoting an unprecedented economic and humanitarian opportunity.  Like the development of nuclear power - to which biotechnology is so often compared - however, it is an opportunity in need of careful public-policy attention.  Accordingly, the federal government, chiefly through the National Biotechnology Advisory Committee of the Department of Industry, Science and Technology, has embarked on a process to develop just such a set of regulations.  The nature of those regulations and the government's diligence in enforcing them will determine in large measure whether Canada succeeds in harnessing biotechnology's benefits while avoiding its risks.  The opportunity is unique, and the issues are complex and varied. 

   Biotechnology, broadly speaking, is not new.  Its origins date back eight to ten thousand years, when humans first began selecting plants for food crops.  Most of our main staples can be traced back to those early discoveries.  Gradually our ancestors learned to breed new, more palatable and productive varieties by means of cross-breeding.  Animal domestication also has a long heritage, and the vast diversity we see today in species like the dog is the result of primitive but intentional breeding.  The ubiquity of livestock such as the cow is a reflection of the success and economic relevance of that human intervention. 

   Though they could not be aware of it then, primitive plant and animal breeders were brewing new combinations of the basic units of heredity - genes.  By mating different varieties of the same species, and in rare cases members of different but sexually compatible species, genes became slightly modified and expressed in subsequent generations.  Genetic engineering, the process pioneered by Boyer and Cohen, however, represents a radical departure in speed and effectiveness.  Its essence lies in the direct manipulation of the hereditary blueprint found in living cells, the deoxyribonucleic acid molecule, or DNA, of which genes are constructed. 

   First identified in the 1940s by Oswald Avery and described chemically in 1953 by Nobel Prize-winning researchers James Watson and Francis Crick, DNA has become a synonym for modern biotechnology.  Its celebrated double-helix structure is a wondrous example of chemistry's graceful symmetry.  The DNA molecule consists of two long, spiralling strands of sugar and phosphate which are joined horizontally - as steps join the sides of a winding staircase - by an alternating sequence of chemical structures.  Each horizontal "step" consists of a pair of chemicals called base pairs which jut out from the sugar-phosphate strands and are joined by weak chemical bonds in the middle.  There are four bases - adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine - and each has an affinity for joining with only one of its potential partners: thymine with adenine and cytosine with guanine.  It is in the sequence of these chemicals up and down the DNA strands that genetic information is encoded, like the sequence of binary digits that instructs a computer to perform its calculations.  Depending on the order of the chemicals along distinct portions of the DNA strand, the DNA molecule will instruct the body to synthesize a variety of distinct chains of amino acids known as polypeptides.  A gene is a linear segment of the DNA strand that contains enough information to direct the cell chemistry to compile a polypeptide.  Polypeptides, in turn, are the building blocks of complex molecules known as proteins. 

   Responsible for a wide range of biological functions in plants, animals, and micro-organisms, proteins come in many different kinds and comprise much of the dry weight of living organisms.  They are composed of 20 different amino acids, differing in character according to the number and order of amino acids in the protein chain.  An average protein is composed of about 100 amino acids.  The order of variously shaped amino acids causes a protein to fold into a specific shape, and by virtue of that shape the protein possesses certain properties that determine organic function and structure.  Proteins, for example, can link with oxygen molecules in the air and carry them to required parts of the body, or they can join together and form visible body features such as hair and muscle.  It is proteins, more than anything else, that are the stuff of life. 

   Biotechnology, whether through the direct intervention of genetic engineering or the relative pot luck of conventional breeding, exploits the relationship between genes and the protein structures they are programmed to build.  What permitted Boyer and Cohen to become direct causal agents in the fusion of genetic information from unrelated species was the discovery in 1970 of a specific set of natural chemical tools known as restriction endonucleases that make it possible to splice segments of DNA from different strands.  These enzymes generally exist to restrict DNA from a foreign species from mingling with the genetic material in bacterial cells.  Since the rules of DNA construction in theory permit DNA from any two species - whether bird, insect, fungus, or human - to intertwine, one of the ways nature ensures the survival of living organisms by maintaining diversity is by erecting barriers to this intermingling.  An example of such a barrier is the restriction endonuclease.  When foreign DNA strays into a bacterial cell, these enzymes identify the strand as foreign and defend the bacterial DNA by shattering it to pieces.  Fortunately for the genetic engineer, the attack is very systematic.  Each type of restriction endonuclease is trained to splice a DNA strand at a specific sequence of base pairs to which it has an aversion.  In doing so, it leaves the broken pieces of DNA - there can be millions of them, depending on the length and make-up of the original DNA - with split ends, like the dangling copper ends of a severed extension cord.  These dangling, unmated bases have a tendency to recombine either with their original base-pair partners or with other dangling bases that possess a complementary sequence to their own.  But because of the great numbers of broken pieces of DNA created by the shattering, it is unlikely they will recombine directly with the complementary bases of their original DNA mates.  So they recombine randomly with neighboring DNA segments, producing a host of small and disordered DNA strands. 

   Genetic engineers use the destructive capacity of restriction endonucleases to shatter and combine DNA strands from different species.  In laboratories, DNA strands from two species are mixed with the restriction endonucleases.  Pieces from the two previously distinct DNA strands, having been shattered at similar base-pair-sequence points, have an equal tendency to combine with each other as with pieces from their original DNA strands.  The random recombination yields a mixture of thousands (and perhaps millions) of diverse molecules, many of them consisting of DNA from both species, known as recombinant DNA.  To this mixture, the genetic engineer then adds enzymes known as ligases to cement the bonds. 

   For a piece of recombinant DNA to be useful in industrial applications, many copies are needed.  Since living cells are capable of dividing rapidly - and in so doing make identical copies of their DNA - genetic engineers use them as DNA factories.  To accomplish this they mix a collection of recombinant DNA into a pool of bacterial cells.  There, parts of cells known as plasmids, pieces of DNA which normally move benignly in an out of cells, latch on to stray bits of foreign DNA and shuttle them into cells.  In some cases, viruses, which also have a tendency to latch on to DNA, are used.  When a virus succeeds in invading a cell, it may also carry with it bits of foreign DNA.  In either case, out of the vast and disorganized colony of altered cells in the broth, cells containing the desired DNA segments (which are far too small to be detected microscopically) must be identified.  This can be accomplished using a variety of methods.  In one method, the broth is laced with radioactivated RNA molecules which hone in on the desired DNA strip and mark it.  According to another, the protein produced by a selected cell is isolated and matched against the protein known to be produced by the desired DNA segment.  Once a bacterium possessing the desired DNA segment - or gene - is located, it can be removed from the broth.  These cells can then be cultivated in large quantities to become the drugs, the chemicals, and the microbes of modern biotechnology.  They are what hold the promise and the threat of an industry which, just two decades ago, was relegated almost exclusively to government and university laboratories, and which, propelled by private enterprise, has become a multi-billion-dollar business.  </I

 
   The first sector to capitalize on genetic engineering was health care, particularly in the US.  In 1983, 10 years after Boyer and Cohen performed the first recombinant DNA experiment, scientists cultivated large quantities of the human gene responsible for synthesizing insulin and marketed it as a treatment for diabetics.  Among the most commercially significant products to emerge since the early 1980s, in addition to insulin, are human growth hormone (which combats dwarfism), alpha interferon (an immune-system stimulator which helps ward off disease), tissue plasminogen activator (which can dissolve blood clots in heart-attack patients), a hepatitis-B vaccine, Ortho Pharmaceuticals' OKT-3 (which helps prevent kidney transplant rejection), and a drug called Epogen (which fights anemia).  Annual worldwide sales of just these seven products have reached $1.25 billion US (Gianturco 208).  Worldwide sales of all biotechnology products last year reached $6 billion.  By the turn of the century sales are expected to soar to more than $100 billion (Canadian Biotech 12). 

   That remarkable growth is now being fuelled by rapidly evolving patent legislation.  In perhaps the most sensational event in the brief history of modern biotechnology, the US Patent and Trademark Office in 1987 passed a policy stating that it "considers non-naturally occurring nonhuman multicellular living organisms, including animals, to be patentable subject matter" (Wallis 78).  That declaration prompted fierce opposition from animal-rights activists who feared the policy would promote the exploratory production of misfit animals incapable of fighting pain or disease.  In Canada, after 10 years of controversy, Parliament this summer passed Bill C-15, the plant breeders' rights act.  Though not as sweeping as the US policy, the legislation for the first time puts plant breeders on a par with inventors of machinery and manufacturing processes, permitting them to protect their new plant varieties with 18-year patents.  As a result, plant breeders will not only be able to collect royalties for the seeds they sell but also for the seed adult plants subsequently produce.  Since the bill was introduced in its original form by the liberal government in 1980, some farm groups, led by the National Farmers' Union, have been insisting it will hand over control of the food supply to a handful of large multi-national corporations. 

  Even in the absence of incentive legislation, however, the Canadian biotechnology industry's growth to date has been impressive.  Sales of Canadian biotechnology products reached $660 million in 1988, while the industry as a whole posted a net after-tax loss of only $3 million, a remarkably strong performance for an infant industry that is having to invest considerably in manufacturing facilities and marketing efforts.  During that same year, Canada's biotechnology companies spent a substantial $275 million on research and development.  While many of Canada's biotechnology enterprises are newly created departments of large industrial firms, most are privately owned start-ups employing fewer than 50 people. 

  Building on Canada's historical strength in agricultural, metallurgical, and forestry research, the industry is distinguished by its primary focus on resource-based products and by its diversity.  A recent survey of the industry sponsored by the Department of Industry, Science and Technology and the National Research Council (NRC) reveals that: 

  The products and processes invented and sold by Canadian biotechnology companies involve nearly every industrial sector.  They include cloned varieties of ornamental plants, bioleaching in the mining of uranium and gold, quick tip-of-the-tongue tests to measure blood alcohol, anaerobic digestion systems for the treatment of pulp mill effluents, the world's first conjugate vaccine, cattle improvement through nuclear transplantation and embryo cloning, monoclonal antibodies for blood typing, soil microbes to improve plant growth, diagnostic kits for AIDS, the brewing of beer, biological pesticides, and mass production of biological reagents from eggs and plants. (Canadian Biotech 1)   

  According to that survey, more than 10,000 products are currently under development, 76% of which are being developed by seed companies. 

   The Canadian industry's plans for future growth are equally impressive.  Companies plan to spend almost $7 million each on new manufacturing facilities by 1992.  By the same year, the industry expects to hire 5,000 new employees, nearly doubling its 1989 work-force.  Sales are expected to grow at an average annual rate of 46% between 1988 and 1992, reaching $5 billion.  The expectations seem realistic, too.  About half of the 220 companies involved in biotechnology in Canada reported net profits in 1988.  Overall, the firms are less indebted than those of many established industrial sectors, with an average debt-to-equity ratio in 1988 of 0.47.  The average assets-to-liability ratio for the industry was a relatively healthy 2.3 (Canadian Biotech 6). 

   Such statistics reveal a vibrant and remarkably strong industry.  Yet the overall picture points to more than an increase in efficiency and quantity of research.  It also reflects an impressive shift in demographics.  Private-sector involvement is rapidly growing against public-sector activity.  Where once research proceeded almost exclusively according to public-policy objectives and at the discretion of government funding bodies, private capital is fuelling an expanding proportion of the new growth.  The dynamics of the marketplace will inevitably play an increasingly vital role in the guidance of that growth.  Clearly, the power and priorities of Canadian biotechnology research are changing.  What will some of those early priorities be, and what are the implications for public policy? 

  II 

   The risks associated with the progress of biotechnology can be divided into two categories, those that arise from the research activities themselves and those that arise from the application of its products.  With the Canadian biotechnology industry still in its infancy, and the bulk of its products still in development, the most imminent risks to consider stem from the process, as opposed to the application, of research.  Ominous signs of the level of ignorance among biotechnology researchers of the regulations that apply to their industry are already evident.  In the survey of 84 companies conducted by the federal government and the NRC from November 1988 to February 1989, only 29 respondents were familiar with the Canadian Environmental Protection Act and its implications for industrial biotechnology.  Although ignorance of regulations will not be tolerated as a plea by the courts, that can only be cold comfort when irresponsible practices have a vast potential to alter - or even destroy - parts of the environment.  If biotechnology has the capacity to do irrevocable damage to humans or their surroundings, retroactive enforcement through punishment could be irrelevant.  Measures to ensure compliance will be - and clearly already are - essential.  Regulatory authorities will thus have to work alongside the industrial biotechnology community to assist in making every member aware of the laws and guidelines that apply to their practices. 

   Enforcement presents another challenge.  As in nuclear research, the containment of potentially hazardous material is a genuine problem, albeit only in a very small minority of cases.  While established firms are likely to conform voluntarily with public policies associated with research methods, smaller firms, which prevail in biotechnology, are likely to take more risks.  This situation stands in stark contrast to the nuclear industry where, because of the scale required by the research and its complexity, small companies are effectively precluded from participating.  A sound regulatory policy should contain provisions for random investigation of private laboratories - not unlike the scrutiny to which the food industry is subject - to ensure that proper measures are taken to minimize the accidental release of potentially hazardous organisms. 

   The risks associated with the testing or application of products in the environment, especially micro-organisms, represent perhaps the most critical area for regulation (Doyle 50).  After all, the goal of biotechnology is to alter the environment.  Concerns for the long-term, broad ecological impact of biotechnology will have special relevance to Canadian research and development, where the vast majority of products are emerging from the natural-resource sectors, particularly agriculture.  Monitoring and controlling the effects of that alteration will be the key issues. 

  III 

   When considering ramifications of the products of biotechnology, the vast majority of which have yet to enter the market, an immediate dilemma presents itself.  Is it possible to regulate effectively an enterprise in which potential risks have yet to be uncovered?  The constant pressure to anticipate risks means regulatory agencies must place strong emphasis on the evolution of policy itself.  The explosive growth of the industry underscores the urgency of that need.  Co-operation from private industry would help identify areas of potential public concern, but it is insufficient.  Neutral expertise is critical.  In an era when so many publicly-funded research institutions have seen their direct government support diminish against the growth of even moderately expanding industries, and have seen their historical neutrality compromised by the growing tendency to make federal funding for research contingent upon industrial investment, the capacity of the vibrant private biotechnology industry seems poised to outstrip the resources of those very scientists whose independent expertise will be critical for informing public policy.  Even if funding for public research were to be maintained at a relatively high level of 4%-6% of real growth, it is hardly a match for the 46% annual rate at which the industry plans to expand.  Government and university research efforts in biotechnology cannot be allowed to languish in their present state of underfunding.  Among other things, public and university laboratories will have to step up research into mathematical modelling and controlled-field testing in order to establish a predictive ecology before widespread release takes place. 

   Another systematic trend that may compromise the goal of a sound and publicly supported regulatory system is evident in the the manner in which the newly formed National Biotechnology Advisory Committee operates - namely, under the auspices of the federal Department of Industry, Science and Technology.  A founding priority of this department is to promote the "development, exploitation and applications of strategic technologies to improve Canada's international competitiveness" ("Regulatory Concerns").  Environment Canada, on the other hand, has no such mandate, and its advice ought to take a prime role in the formulation of regulations.  Can the Department of Industry, Science and Technology and the regulatory advisory body it oversees continue to be regarded as neutral sources of scrutiny by the biotechnology industry's present critics, while that department offers direct or indirect subsidies to industry and publicly champions industry's attempts to become globally competitive? 

   Even more important, because more than three-quarters of the products under development in Canada fall into the category of seed research, Canadian regulations will require specific attention to the impact of this research on accidental transmission and genetic diversity.  Plant research, unlike chemical, pharmaceutical, and animalian research, will in many cases require widespread dispersal of experimental genetic material into the environment.  Geographically dispersed material is generally more susceptible to the influences of a host of uncontrollable environmental factors, such as bioleaching into soil and transport by wind, micro-organisms, and animals.  Measures for assessing the potential of accidental transport, as well as the eventual fate of experimental material in the environment, will be crucial. 

   Because agricultural applications of biotechnology can be expected to produce key crops with higher commercial value, it can be expected that biotechnology companies will find willing customers in the Canadian farming industry.  Measures should be taken to ensure that any reduction in genetic diversity through the widespread planting of these key crops will not make the food supply more susceptible to genetic diseases.  This may entail preserving a greater number of existing varieties in seed banks.  The potential for lost diversity also raises an interesting question for the issue of farm support.  Will farmers who attempt to remain competitive by planting only those crops with the highest commercial value be required to bear the burden of sudden losses to their incomes if their crops are wiped out by disease? 

   Insurance against such catastrophes might be obtained in another, potentially more controversial way.  Even if consumers show a strong demand for new "super" varieties, it is possible to promote the desirable goal of genetic diversity by taxing the consumption of these crops.  While the idea of limiting consumer choice through disincentives might seem antithetical to a market-driven economy, it is nevertheless consistent with a society that places high value on environmental security and human health.  Many western societies have already set precedents for market-intervention where public health and safety have been concerned.  Tobacco taxes, despite their threat to some farmers' interests, have enjoyed widespread public support in many countries, including Canada.  Would it be unthinkable, then, to impose taxes on crop varieties that, because of their popularity, limit diversity and thus threaten the food supply?  It has been suggested in the case of tobacco, and not without reasonable justification, that a portion of the proceeds from taxes be diverted to hospitals for the treatment of cancer and heart disease.  Would it be unreasonable to divert the proceeds from taxes on popular crops toward maintaining seed banks? 

   As important as any specific regulatory consideration, finally, is the active participation of the public throughout the advisory process. 
 </I

 

   Wetland vegetation near Old Crow, northern Yukon  
  LYNN OVENDEN 
   Geological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1A 0E8  
  AND 
  GUY R. BRASSARD 
   Department of Biology, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada A1B 3X9  
  Received March 11, 1988 

  OVENDEN, L., and BRASSARD, G. R. 1989. Wetland vegetation near Old Crow, northern Yukon. Can. J. Bot. 67: 954-960. 

   Wetland vegetation on lowlands of northern Yukon was related to gradients of pH, peat depth, and active-layer depth using detrended correspondence analysis.  Seven vegetation types were distinguished by two-way indicator species analysis: Arctophila shoreline marsh, Carex aquatilis - Sphagnum - Chamaedaphne wet meadow, Scorpidium - sedge carpet, Carer rotundata - Andromeda - Sphagnum orientate lawn, Sphagnum - heath on firm peat, thickets and tussock tundra, and Calamagrostis canadensis meadow.  The Arctophila marshes and tussocky shrublands resemble other sites in the subarctic and low arctic wetland regions of North America while Sphagnum - heath on firm peat is typical of high boreal and subarctic wetlands.  The wet meadow, carpet. and lawn types of sedge - moss vegetation cannot be characterized as arctic or boreal because the geographic patterns of sedge - moss wetlands in northwestern North America remain unclear. 

 

   Introduction  

   Vegetation associations and habitat gradients have been determined from a few wetland complexes in the Canadian Arctic (Muc 1977; Vitt and Pakarinen 1977; Sheard and Geale 1983; Miller and Alpert 1984) and from several complexes in the low and mid-boreal (see Kenkel 1987) wetland regions, as mapped by the National Wetlands Working Group (1986).  Comparable studies are rare in the subarctic and high boreal wetland regions, which include the most extensive peat deposits of North America.  Permafrost influences the development and morphology of wetlands (Zoltai and Tarnocai 1975) in these regions, which include the zone of discontinuous permafrost and the southern fringe of the continuous permafrost zone (Brown 1977).  Polygonal peat plateaux, peat plateaux, and patterned fens characterize subarctic wetlands.  Permafrost underlies all wetlands but shoreline fens in the high subarctic, but is absent from patterned fens in the low subarctic (National Wetlands Working Group 1986). 

   A peatland project in northern Yukon Territory provided a chance to describe several sites in a large wetland complex of the high subarctic wetland region.  This paper provides a floristic and structural description of these wetlands and relates them to other reports of wetland vegetation in northwestern North America. 

   Study area  

   Two large old lake basins occur near the village of Old Crow, about 150 km south of the Beaufort Sea (Fig. 1).  Glacial meltwater deposited a thick bed of grey clay during the Late Wisconsinan stadial and finally drained away by 12 000 years BP (Matthews et al. 1987).  Today the basins are poorly drained expanses of patterned peatland and shallow thermokarst lakes.  Shoreline erosion is active in many lakes.  Regional treeline is just north of the Old Crow Flats.  Mean July and January temperatures at Old Crow are 14.2 and -33.1C, respectively, and mean annual temperature is -10.1C.  Mean annual precipitation is 215 mm (Environment Canada 1982).  The mean annual number of thawing degree-days is about 1900 (Burns 1973).  The area lies within the southernmost part of the continuous permafrost zone (Brown 1977). 

   Methods  

   In July of 1979 and 1981, field studies were carried out by the first author.  The second author identified most moss collections, except for Sphagnum specimens, which were identified by D.H. Vitt, University of Alberta.  Voucher specimens of the mosses are deposited at Memorial University and the University of Alberta. 

   At each vegetation site, the percent cover of each species was estimated within an area of 50 - 100 m 2.  In fields of low-centre polygons, separate species lists were compiled for the wet centres and dry ridges of the polygons.  Mosses that could not be identified in the field were characterized and collected: as a check, several handfuls of moss were gathered at random throughout the site and later identified. 

   Three habitat variables at each site were measured: pH (using narrow range dual strip test paper), depth to frost table, and depth of peat (defined as material with loss-on-ignition greater than 80%).  Water pH at each site was tested, either in a polygon trough, between tussocks, in an adjacent pool, or as seepage into a soil pit.  To convert depth to frost table to a less date-dependent estimate of active layer depth, 0.2 cm was added to the measurement for each day before August 1 that it was made.  Since rate of thaw is highly dependent on moisture conditions at a site (Brown 1977: Ryden and Kostov 1980), this estimate of active-layer depth is an index of the relative wetness of each site.  

   Estimates of percent cover were obtained for 65 vascular and 70 moss taxa noted from 74 vegetation sites.  This data set was condensed by removing taxa that occurred in two sites or less, and by grouping species within some genera.  Structure in the resulting data set, of 50 vascular and 39 nonvascular taxa, was explored by ordination (detrended correspondence analysis, DECORANA) and classification (two-way indicator species analysis, TWINSPAN) procedures. 

   Results  

   The first axis of the ordination reflects a strong moisture gradient (Fig. 2), indicated by a high correlation (r= 0.79) of stand score on this axis with active-layer depth.  At all but two of the sites (27, 30) with scores over 100 on the first axis, the water table occurred at or above the vegetation surface. 

   The second axis is significantly correlated with peat depth (r= -0.44, p Sites with a mineral substrate have high scores on this axis and include species that are early colonizers of drained lakebeds on the arctic coast (Ovenden 1986): Arctophila fulva, Calamagrostis canadensis, Arctagrostis latifolia, Equisetum arvense, and Stellaria longipes.  The distribution of ice wedge polygons is also related to peat depth (all sites with  Consequently, most sites that lack distinct ice wedge polygons have high scores on the second axis. 

   Although pH is an imperfect index of dissolved nutrients in fen waters (Sjors 1983), it is closely related to the vegetational gradient poor fen - rich fen (Sjors 1983) and may be linked to trophic status (Pakarinen and Ruuhijarvi 1978).  The pH of the Old Crow sites varies from 4.2-5.8; this gradient is significantly correlated with both the first axis (r= 0.46) and second axis (r= 0.41) of the vegetation ordination.  Sites with low pH and species characteristic of poor fens and oligotrophic mires in Scandinavia (Sjors 1983; Pakarinen and Ruuhijarvi 1978) have low scores on both the first and second axes, while sites with pH 

   In boreal regions, Scorpidium scorpioides, Calliergon trifarium, Campylium stellatum, and Tomenthypnum nitens, are indicators of rich fens (pH  This phenomenon has also been observed on nutrient-deficient peatlands of the Soviet tundra zone (Botch and Masing 1983). 

   TWINSPAN identified seven physiognomic vegetation types (Table 1).  Observations of aquatic vegetation in lakes of the region will be provided first, followed by descriptions of the seven vegetation types. 

   Thermokarst lakes near Old Crow  

   Most of these lakes are 2-3m deep (Matthews et al. 1987) with a pH of 5.0-5.6.  Some support   Nuphar polysepalum (especially in the Bluefish Basin and southern half of the Old Crow Flats) and more rarely, Ceratophyllum demersum (Cwynar 1983).  A large shallow lake in the western Old Crow Flats (XV on Fig. 1) is mostly 65 cm deep with 5-40% cover of Potamogeton richardsonii.  Within 100m of its shore, at the same depth, Potamogeton alpinus subsp. tenuifolius, Potamogeton cf. Berchtoldii, Hippuris vulgaris, Myriophyllum spicatum, and Callitriche hermaphroditica are abundant.  Oospores of Chara or Nitella occur in the surface sediment of some lakes (Ovenden 1985). 

   Group 1: Arctophila fulva marsh  

   Each of the three sites studied is a band of marshy vegetation growing in up to 65 cm of water in silty sediment.  Arctophila fulva and Carex aquatilis are the dominant vascular taxa. Loose, floating mats of Drepanocladus exannulatus, Potentilla palustris, and Myriophyllum spicatum are also important.  Ranunculus trichophyllus, R. gmelinii, Eleocharis acicularis, and Senecio congestus, which occur as seeds in nearshore sediments of the lakes (Ovenden 1985), are probably present, in addition to other taxa listed in Table 1. 

   Group 2:  Carex aquatilis - Chamaedaphne - Sphagnum meadow  

   These sites consist of scattered low shrubs in a moderately dense sward of rhizomatous sedges and cottongrass.  The moss cover is almost continuous and occurs in semisubmersed, floating, and soft cushion forms.  Four species were found at all five sites in this group: Andromedia polifolia, Chamaedaphne calyculata, Carex aquatilis, and Eriophorum russeolum. Drepanocladus and Sphagnum grew at each site, particularly D. lapponicus, D. exannulatus, S. squarrosum, S. rubellum, S. warnstorfii, and S. fuscum.  Betula glandulosa, Potentilla palustris, Oxycoccus, Carex chordorrhiza, and Meesia spp. are also characteristic.  Of the five sites in this group, two occurred in recent meander swales of the Old Crow River, one bordered a small pond, and two formed broad meadows in young thermokarst basins.  The pH was 5.0 at the two last sites.  None displayed obvious ice-wedge polygons or oriented peat ridges. 

   

   Group 3:  Scorpidium - sedge carpet  

   This distinctive assemblage usually contains the following taxa: Scorpidium scorpioides, Drepanocladus revolvens, Calliergon trifarium, Carex limosa, Carex rotundata, Carex chordorrhiza, Eriophorum russeolum, Eriophorum angustifolium, Utricularia intermedia, and Menyanthes trifoliata.  They form a loose mat that floats over flocculent organic mud.  Sphagnum is lacking or sparse except at site 54, where S. jensenii is dominant.  Five sites from group 3 border ponds or lakes and exhibit no peat ridges or evidence of polygons.  The remainder are enclosed by a polygonal or more irregular network of frostcored peat ridges.  Frozen substrate occurred 39 - 58 cm beneath eight of the sites, but none was found (within 80 cm) at the remaining three sites.  The pH ranged from 5.0 - 5.8 except at site 54, where it was 4.4. 

   Group 4: Carex rotundata - Andromeda - Sphagnum orientale lawn  

   All sites in this group are low-centre polygons.  At most, the vegetation is a diffuse lawn of sedges and dwarf shrubs in a floating moss mat, with an active layer of 46 - 56 cm.  Site 9 is firmer.  Common to all six sites are Carex rotundata, Andromeda polifolia, and Sphagnum orientale.  Dwarf birch, Oxycoccus, Eriophorum russeolum, Pedicularis, Trichophorum caespitosum, Sphagnum balticum, and   Drepanocladus   are usually present.  Generally, peat depth exceeded 50 cm. 

   Group 5: Sphagnum - heath on firm peat  

   These sites are the ridges of low-centre polygons or polygonal peat plateaus with level or slightly concave polygons 20 - 30 m in diameter.  Most are acidic (pH = 4.4), with a shallow active layer.  At some sites (39, 40, 49, 56, 60, 66), the peat is over 1.5 m deep and represents 5000 - 11 000 years accumulation (Ovenden 1985).  The younger, shallower peat deposits are indistinctly polygonal or lack ice wedges.  Low shrubs and mosses generally predominate, although most of the ground cover is ericaceous litter and lichens at the drier sites.  The peat forms a firm, even ground surface and sedge tussocks are not important, as they are in group 6.  Several taxa are common in both groups 5 and 6: Ledum decumbens, Vaccinium vitis - idaea, Andromeda, Rubus chamaemorus, Betula glandulosa, Eriophorum vaginatum, Polytrichum, Aulacomnium turgidum, Dicranum angustum, and lichens.   Sites of group 5 are distinguished from those in group 6 by the presence of   Sphagnum lenense, S. fuscum, S. balticum, and abundant Rubus chamaemorus.  Firm peat deposits are sparsely treed (Picea spp.) throughout the Bluefish Basin and along the southern margin of the Old Crow Flats. 

   Group 6: Tall shrub thickets, tussock tundra, and tussock woodlands  

   These are 1.0 - 1.5 m tall thickets of Salix pulchra, Salix glauca, Betula glandulosa, and (or) Alnus crispa, with a ground layer of sedge or cottongrass tussocks and dwarf shrubs.   Vaccinium uliginosum, Pyrola rotundifolia, Arctostaphylos rubra, Carex lugens, Sphagnum fimbriatum, Hylocomium splendens, and Aulacomnium palustre distinguish this group.  The active layer is generally shallow ( 
 </I

 
   Biogeography of island floras in the Great Lakes.  I. Species richness and composition in relation to gull nesting activities  

  E. H. Hogg 

   Boreal Institute for Northern Studies, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta., Canada T6G 2E9  
  AND 
  J. K. Morton and Joan M. Venn 
   Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ont., Canada N2L 3G1  
  Received March 15, 1988 

  HOGG, E. H., MORTON, J. K., and VENN, J. M. 1989.  Biogeography of island floras in the Great Lakes.  I. Species richness and composition in relation to gull nesting activities. Can. J. Bot. 67: 961 - 969.  

   Species - area relations of vascular plants and the effect of nesting colonies of gulls on plant species composition were investigated for 77 islands in Georgian Bay and Lake Huron in the Great Lakes region of Canada.  The percentage of plant species classed as alien, annual, or biennial was significantly greater on islands with gull colonies.  The slope of the species - area curve was significantly steeper on islands supporting gull colonies compared with islands lacking gull colonies.  The expected decline in species richness with increased island remoteness was not detected statistically using multiple regression analysis.  The difference in species - area slopes does not appear to reflect a lower propagule immigration rate to islands with gull colonies, because gulls are important in the dispersal of alien plant species to these islands.  Larger islands with gull colonies tended to have richer floras than islands of similar size without gull colonies.  It is suggested that on these larger islands the presence of gull colonies produces a gradient of soil nutrient and disturbance regimes, thus increasing habitat heterogeneity and species richness. 

 

   Introduction  

   In the nesting colonies of gulls and other seabirds, vegetation is often strongly affected by guano deposition and physical disturbance associated with nesting activity (Gillham 1956; Sobey and Kenworthy 1979: Hogg and Morton 1983).  The tendency, in areas occupied by seabird colonies, is for perennials to be replaced by annuals, and for native species to be replaced by alien weeds (Gillham 1961; Hogg and Morton 1983).  The severe conditions associated with active seabird nesting sites can also result in species-poor plant communities (Gillham 1960, 1962; Weseloh and Brown 1971; McCain 1975; Sobey and Kenworthy 1979; Hogg and Morton 1983).  Small islands are frequently selected as nesting sites by seabirds because of the protection that they offer against mammalian predators (Southern et al. 1985; Timoney et al. 1985).  However, few studies of island biogeography have specifically investigated the impact of nesting seabirds on the composition and species richness of island floras. 

   In Georgian Bay and the Canadian part of Lake Huron, there are numerous small islands, many of which harbour large colonies of nesting Ring-billed and Herring Gulls (Larus delawarensis and Larus argentatus).  The population of nesting gulls in the region was estimated at 172 000 pairs in 1980,which represents a major increase during the previous 20 years (Weseloh et al. 1986).  Human disturbance is minimal on most of the islands, thus providing an excellent opportunity for a phytogeographic study of island floras, some of which are being strongly affected by gull nesting activity.  The objective of this study was to examine the floras of these islands in relation to their size, distance from the nearest mainland, and the presence or absence of nesting gulls. 

   The slope, z, of the power function relationship between species number and island size has received considerable attention in the literature (Gilbert 1980).  In the past, values of z were often used to test predictions arising from the MacArthur and Wilson (1963, 1967) equilibrium theory of island biogeography, but this approach has recently been criticized for several reasons (see Connor and McCoy 1979: Gilbert 1980; Martin 1981; Abbott 1983).  In the present study we determined z for islands with and without gull colonies primarily as a tool to examine the influence of nesting gulls on plant species richness over a wide range of island size.  We also used multiple regression analysis to factor out the effect of area on species diversity (Connor and McCoy 1979) so that the effect of gull colonies and island remoteness on plant species number could be investigated. 

  

   Study area  

   The islands selected for this study are limestone and dolomite islands of Lake Huron, Georgian Bay, and the North Channel (Fig. I).  Most have a low relief, rising only a few metres above present-day lake levels.  During the Nipissing period, which lasted from about 6000 to 4000 years ago, lake levels in the region were about 16 - 23 m higher relative to present-day shorelines (Nichols 1972; Morton and Venn 1984, 1987).  Thus, nearly all of these islands have emerged as dry land since then, and many are probably no more than a few hundred years old.  As a result, their floras have been derived from the neighbouring mainland and islands by dispersal across the intervening expanses of fresh water.  Most of the species show clear adaptations for dispersal by water and birds, while a few appear to have been dispersed by wind or human activity (J.K. Morton and E.H. Hogg, unpublished). 

   Many of the islands have extensive, sparsely vegetated beaches of gravel, cobbles, and slabs pushed up by waves and winter ice.  On several, there are limestone pavements that support a rich herbaceous flora.  These beaches and limestone pavements provide nesting habitat for large colonies of Ring-billed and Herring Gulls that strongly affect the vegetation of their nesting sites (Hogg and Morton 1983).  The larger islands are mainly wooded, usually with a dense scrub forest of Betula papyrifera, Populus tremuloides, Prunus virginiana, Thuja occidentalis, Abies balsamea, and Picea glauca with occasional Sorbus decora, Populus balsamifera, Fraxinus pennsylvanica, and Ulmus americana.  Nomenclature follows Morton and Venn (1987). 

   Methods  

  The analysis is based on the vascular floras of 77 limestone and dolomite islands in Georgian Bay, Lake Huron, and the North Channel in Ontario, Canada.  Floristic data used in the analysis came from the following sources: Morton and Venn (1984) for the islands adjacent Manitoulin Island; Morton and Venn (1987) for the Tobermory Islands off the northern tip of the Bruce Peninsula; J.K. Morton and E.H. Hogg (unpublished) for Barrier Island near Cape Croker on the Bruce Peninsula; and J.K. Morton and J.M. Venn (unpublished) for North and South Limestone Islands in eastern Georgian Bay (Fig. 1).  The area of each island was determined from 1:50 000 scale topographic maps or, for the smaller islands, from nautical charts (1:40 000 or 1:15 000 scale), based on the number of 1-mm grid squares occupied by the island on graph paper overlaying the map or chart.  The distance of each island to the nearest mainland was also determined.  Manitoulin Island, being large (2766 km2) and narrowly separated from the north shore of Georgian Bay and the North Channel, was considered to be "mainland" for the purposes of this study. 

   The islands were divided into the following two groups: (i) islands with a high density of nesting seabirds ("gull islands") and (ii) islands lacking seabird nests or having a low nest density ("non-gull islands").  For most islands, the mean number of nests per hectare was calculated using the 1980 seabird census data provided by the Canadian Wildlife Service (Weseloh et al. 1986).  However, because of variability in seabird colony size from year to year, we supplemented this information with field observations made during the present study and from an earlier seabird census (Ludwig 1962).  Of the 77 islands examined, 27 were designated as gull islands (mean nest density ranged from 35 - 4000 nests/ha) while the remaining 50 were classed as nongull islands (0 - 8 nests/ha).  Ring-billed and Herring Gulls were by far the most abundant seabird species, but there were also nesting populations of Common and Caspian Terns (Sterna hirundo and Sterna caspia) and rookeries of the Great Blue Heron (Ardea herodias) on several of the islands. 

   Each vascular plant species recorded was categorized according to its probable origin (i.e., native or alien) following Morton and Venn (1984, 1987); and its life history characteristic (annual, biennial, or perennial) was categorized according to Fernald (1950), Gleason (1952), and McDonald (1937).  For each island, the number of species in each of the following categories was recorded: alien annual, alien biennial, alien perennial, native annual, native biennial, and native perennial.  The percentage of species in each category was then calculated from the total flora of each island.  The arcsine transformation (Zar 1984) was applied to the percentage data and two-sample t -tests were used to compare the floras of gull and nongull islands.  Because of the influence of human activity on several of the larger islands, this portion of the analysis was restricted to small islands that are 50 ha in size.  The small island category included all 27 of the gull islands and 35 of the nongull islands.  One of the gull islands (White Shingle) was omitted from the comparison because its flora contained only eight species. 

   The relationship between species number and island size was investigated for (i) gull islands, (ii) small nongull islands, and (iii) all nongull islands.  Linear regressions were conducted using several transformations of S (number of species) and A (island area in hectares), which gave equations of the following forms: 

 Equations 1 and 2 are the power function and exponential model, respectively, that have both been commonly used in regression analyses of species - area relationships (Connor and McCoy 1979).  Equations 3 and 4 were used in the attempt to more adequately linearize the relationship between species number and area in the exponential model. 

   The influence of island remoteness, D (distance to mainland measured in kilometres), on species number was also examined by multiple linear regression.  Equations 1 - 4 above, modified by adding the term k 2 x D, were used (k2 is a constant).  

   Results  

   Composition of island floras  

   The combined floras of the 62 small islands with areas of  Of the alien species, 32 (28%) are annuals, 21 (18%) are biennials, while the remaining 62 (54%) are perennials.  Table 1 gives the number of species, area, distance to mainland, and percent composition of the floras (divided into origin and life-history characteristic) for each of these small islands and also for the 15 larger islands. 

   The comparison of floras on the small islands (Table 2) shows that species categorized as either alien or annual are more strongly represented on islands with nesting gull colonies.  Where these two features coincide the difference is most striking: the percentage composition of alien annuals is four times as high on gull islands (8.2%) than on nongull islands (2.0%).  Alien biennials are also strongly favoured on gull islands, but to a lesser extent (ratio = 3.0) than alien annuals.  Alien perennials and native annuals, which each have only one characteristic favoured in gull colonies (i.e., alien or annual) are both favoured on gull islands by a modest and approximately equal amount (ratio = 1.8).  The proportion of native biennials is about the same on gull and nongull islands.  The percentage of native perennials (which lack both of the favoured characteristics for gull islands) was significantly greater on nongull islands (83%) than on gull islands (64%). 

   Linear regressions of species number and island size  

   Linear regressions of species richness in relation to island size are given in Table 3.  For each of the four equations used, the slope of the species - area curve (z) was significantly greater for gull islands (size range of 0.2 - 39 ha) than for small nongull islands with a similar size range (0.4 - 44 ha) (Fig. 2).  When the analysis was expanded to include large nongull islands (up to 4970 ha), the difference in z  between gull and nongull islands remained significant using [1] and [4], but was not significant using [2] and [3].  
 </I

    Late Quaternary volcanic ash in the peatlands of central Alberta  

  S. C. ZOLTAI 

   Canadian Forestry Service, Northern Forestry Centre. 5320-122 St., Edmonton, Alta. Canada T6H 3S5  
  Received February 16, 1988 
  Revision accepted May 17, 1988 

   Three distinct volcanic-ash layers were identified in peat deposits through visual, microscopic, and chemical means.  These layers were related to known volcanic events through the 14C dating of 34 peat samples.  The upper layer was probably Bridge River ash, deposited about 2350 years BP.  The middle layer was possibly St. Helens Y tephra, deposited around 3400 years BP.  The lower ash was related to Mazama tephra, deposited about 6600 years BP.  Ash-enriched layers were formed in the accumulating peat as aerial deposition of tephra occurred, often for several hundred years before and after the presumed main eruption, as shown by  14 C dates and peat accumulation rates.  This implies periodic eruptions by the volcanoes, not all of which produced distinct ash layers in areas distant from the source.  Redeposition from wind-eroded beds of Mazama ash during the dry postglacial climatic maximum is a possibility. 

 

  Can. J. Earth Sci. 26. 207 - 214 (1989) 

   Introduction  

   The widespread occurrence of volcanic ash in western North America is well documented (Powers and Wilcox 1964: Westgate and Dreimanis 1967).  Late Quaternary volcanic-ash beds have been associated with Glacier Peak in Washington, Mount Mazama in Oregon (Powers and Wilcox 1964), Mount St. Helens in Washington, Plinth-Meager Mountain area near Bridge River in British Columbia (Valentine et al. 1987), and Mount Bona in the St. Elias Range in Alaska (Lerbekmo and Campbell 1969). 

   The particle size and abundance of tephra diminish with distance from the source volcano.  Alberta is hundreds of kilometres from the sources; hence only limited amounts of fine-grained tephra can be found.  The distribution of the tephra is often limited to narrow plumes, determined by the prevailing winds at the time of the eruptions.  Close to the source continuous volcanic ash mantles the entire landscape, but in Alberta the ash layers are discontinuous, often concentrated by secondary deposition in areas sheltered from the wind.  Peatlands are particularly suited for the study of volcanic-ash deposition.  The peatland surfaces are wet and well vegetated, trapping the atmospherically deposited tephra.  Furthermore, light amounts of volcanic ashfall do not kill the vegetation and a continuous record of ash enrichment is preserved in the accumulating peat. 

   Peat bogs have long been used by researchers to reveal the presence of one or more volcanic-ash layers (Hansen 1949; Fryxell 1965; Westgate et al. 1969).  Not only are the ash layers well preserved in this quiescent depositional environment (Westgate et al. 1970), but also the peat enveloping the tephra layers provides a ready source of carbon for 14C analyses. 

   In central Alberta, over 500 km from the nearest of the tephra sources, the volcanic-ash layers can be very thin (1-2 mm) and barely visible with the naked eye (Westgate et al. 1969; Lichti-Federovich 1970).  Under the microscope, however, additional volcanic-ash-enriched layers that are otherwise invisible to the unaided eye may become evident.  In this paper the occurrences of both visible and nonvisible volcanic-ash layers are presented and their possible source is discussed on the basis of radiocarbon dates. 

   Methods  

   During 1981, 1984, and 1986 a total of 76 peatlands were cored in Alberta and adjoining Saskatchewan, generally north of the North Saskatchewan River.  A modified Macaulay peat corer with an inside diameter of 34 mm was used and samples were collected at the surface and at 15 cm intervals.  In many peatlands more than one core was taken to determine the physical, chemical, and floristic variability of the peat deposits.  A number of samples were taken with a peat profile cutter (Wardenaar 1987), which extracted 170 cm x 10 cm x 10 cm peat columns.  The peatlands were both fens and bogs (Zoltai et al. 1975), the main difference being that bogs receive only atmospheric water but the fens also receive seepage water. 

   In the laboratory the samples were oven dried and then ashed at 480C.  The ash was treated with hot nitric and hydrochloric acid, and the residue was extracted with hydrochloric acid and filtered.  The filter paper was burned, and the weight of the residual acid-insoluble ash was expressed as a percentage of the dry sample.  The filtrate was analyzed with an inductively coupled argon plasma spectrometer for Ca, Mg, K, Al, S, P, Mn, Fe, Zn, Cu. Ni, Pb, Ti, and Na.  Details on the instrument and sample preparation were reported elsewhere (Ali et al. 1988). 

   The volcanic-glass content was determined under a polarizing microscope.  A small amount of acid-insoluble ash was examined by counting 200 grains of soil particles, including crystalline and tephra grains.  The volcanic-glass content was expressed as a percentage of all counted particles.  The morphology of individual tephra grains and the abundance of various forms were noted.  Selected peat samples were submitted for 14 C dating to Brock University (BGS) and to Alberta Environmental Centre Vegreville (AECV).  

   Results  

   Volcanic-ash layers  

   Volcanic ash was found in 24 of the investigated peatlands.  The ash deposits can be identified visually where they occur as distinct layers, microscopically where the ash is dispersed in a peaty zone, and chemically through the analysis of some elements. 

   Visible volcanic-ash layers occur as distinct white- to buff-coloured layers.  They can be straight and even, or they can be contorted by differential movements in the peat after deposition.  In many cases the ash layers are discontinuous and have variable thickness, possibly reflecting the contour of depositional surfaces.  At an intensively studied site (site 7) the peat-land was cored on a 200 m grid.  A visible ash layer was found between 1.5 and 2 m depth at only 6 of the 21 cored sites.  Attempts to relocate an ash layer for further sampling often failed even when cores were taken only a few centimetres from a core that showed a clearly visible ash layer.  On the other hand, at many sites in the western part of the study area there are two or three parallel volcanic ash layers, separated by up to 10 cm of peat (Fig. 1). 

   Identification of nonvisible volcanic-ash-enriched zones can be accomplished by the examination of the acid-insoluble peat residue under a polarizing microscope.  The individual volcanic-glass shards are usually  Their irregular shape distinguishes them from biogenic silicate materials.  The ash-enriched zones are invariably thicker than the visible ash layers, extending both above and below the visible ash.  Some of these zones are 80 cm thick.  Nonvisible ash zones could be found more consistently at different locations in the same peat-land than visible ash layers.  At the intensively surveyed site 7 all 21 cores had an ash-enriched layer between 1.5 and 2 m. 

   The morphology of individual tephra grains consists of three distinct types.  The most common form is thin polygonal plates with straight edges, often associated with elongated three-sided prisms.  Such prisms often contain inclusions of minerals or gas.  This type is informally identified as bubble-wall material.  The second type is thick, irregular to somewhat elongated grains that have large amounts of gas and mineral inclusions.  This material resembles comminuted pumice.  The third type is elongated cylindrical shapes that have an oval cross section (needles).  Enclosures of gas are often present as bubble trains elongated along the long axis. 

   The treatment of ached peat residue with hydrochloric and nitric acid (aqua regia) removes the readily acid-soluble minerals leaving resistant minerals, such as quartz and field spar, in the residue (Jackson et al. 1986).  Volcanic glass, composed mainly of SiO 2 (silica), is not dissolved in the acid treatment, as shown by the close relationship between amounts of acid-insoluble ash and volcanic ash (Fig. 2). 

   Volcanic ash is composed of elements that are considerably different from the components of the peat.  The bulk of the ash is SiO2 and Al2O3, with significant amounts of FeO, Na20, CaO, and K2O (Westgate et al. 1970).  Among the minor constituents, TiO 2 is noteworthy.  It probably originates from high-TiO 2 magnetites present in the tephra (King et al. 1982).  Most of the major elemental constituents occur commonly in peat, originating from airborne dust and from water-soluble and biologically generated sources.  However, it was found that Ti and Al are associated with high levels of volcanic ash (Si was not determined) (Fig. 2).  Titanium is particularly useful as an indicator because background levels of Ti are low in the study area and the main source is the volcanic aerosol. 

   The advantage of using microscopic and chemical means to identify the nonvisible ash layers is demonstrated in Fig. 2.  In the upper and middle zone the ash grain count and the Ti and Al analyses show distinct peaks, although the acid-insoluble ash is low, possibly because of the small size and low weight of the volcanic-ash grains.  At the base of the lower ash zone all indicators show high values, but the underlying mineral soil is distinguished by the absence of volcanic-ash grains and low Ti values. 

   The examination of peat through radiocarbon dating and through visual, microscopic, and chemical methods resulted in the identification of three distinct volcanic-ash layers and ash-enriched zones.  In cases where radiocarbon control was not available the tephra was assigned to an ash zone on the basis of stratigraphic position and tephra morphology. 

   The depth at which the ash-enriched zones and ash layers occur is not constant because of different rates of peat accumulation in different kinds of wetlands.  The relative position of the ash-enriched zones within the peat deposit is, however, relatively constant, except in anomalous, eroding peat deposits such as site 11.  The base of the upper ash-enriched zone is about a third of the way down the peat column, the middle zone is at about the middle of the peat column, and the lower zone is near the base of the peat column (Table 1). 

   The upper ash-enriched zone was found at 13 locations in peat deposits in the western part of central Alberta (Fig. 3).  It had an average thickness of 3cm (Table 1).  Visible ash was relatively rare in this area (sites 5, 6, and 11; Fig. 3); where present, it was thin and discontinuous (Kearney and Luckman 1983).  The ash consists of about equal proportions of pumice and bubble-wall materials, with rare but constant vesicular needle grains. 

   At 12 sites in the peatlands of central Alberta the middle ash-enriched zone was found in about the same areas as the upper zone (Fig. 4).  The middle zone had an average thickness of 11cm (Table 1).  Visible ash layers were common (sites 2, 7, 8, 9, and 11; Fig. 4).  At site 7 three distinct layers could be discerned (Fig. 1), but the ash generally occurred in a single layer.  The ash consists primarily of pumice, with much lower proportions of bubble-wall material. 

   The lower ash-enriched zone had the widest distribution in the peatlands of central Alberta (Fig. 5).  It contained one or two visible ash layers in the sites west of Edmonton, but visible volcanic ash was not detected in the peat to the north-east.  The ash-enriched zone was thick, averaging 23cm (Table 1).  The ash consists almost exclusively of bubble-wall materials. 

   Radiocarbon dating  

   A total of 33 14C dates are available for samples from 10 peatlands and one lake in central Alberta where the organic deposits were directly relevant to the volcanic-ash layers and ash-enriched zones (Table 2).  These dates provide an approximation of the time of visible ash deposition and the period during which the ash-enriched layer was deposited.  However, most of the dates are some centimetres above or below the ash layer, necessitating a projection of the date on the basis of the rate of peat accumulation.  By assuming a uniform rate of peat formation, one can calculate the rate of peat accumulation between a dated section and the surface (0 years) or between two dated sections.  This rate can then be used to estimate the projected age of any point within the peat section. 
 </I

 
   P - T history and kinematics of the Monashee Decollement near Revelstoke, British Columbia 1   

  LARRY S. LANE 

   Institute of Sedimentary and Petroleum Geology, 3303 - 33rd St. NW, Calgary, Alta., Canada T2L 2A7  

  EDWARD D. GHENT AND MAVIS Z. STOUT 
 Department of Geology and Geophysics, The University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta., Canada T2N 1N4 AND  
  RICHARD L. BROWN 
 Department of Earth Sciences, Carleton University, and Ottawa - Carleton Geoscience Centre, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1S 5B6  

  Received January 5, 1988 

  Revision accepted May 17, 1988 

  Microstructural and petrofabric analyses of mylonites from the Monashee Decollement demonstrate that the hanging wall was displaced eastward over the footwall.  Microstructural kinematic indicators include shear-band foliation, asymmetric strain shadows, and S - C fabrics.  Quartz c axes locally exhibit asymmetric fabrics that are consistent with the microstructural evidence for sense of shear.  The kinematic evidence is reliable because multiple criteria coexist within individual specimens. 

   Metamorphic assemblages from footwall Monashee Complex pelites at the Revelstoke damsite indicate that the peak metamorphic assemblage was sillimanite - K-feldspar - biotite - almandine - quartz +/- plagioclase.  Biotite - garnet geothermometry and garnet - plagioclase - sillimanite - quartz geobarometry set broad constraints on metamorphic temperatures but closer constraints on pressures, near 650C and 630 MPa. 

   Comparison of these data with Late Cretaceous hornblende cooling ages from the same locality indicates that the metamorphism is at least as old as Late Cretaceous.  Complex microstructures relating to repeated mylonitization and annealing render difficult the correlation of metamorphic conditions with mylonitic fabrics.  Early mylonitic textures predate the metamorphic equilibration and thus are pre-Late Cretaceous in age.  Postmetamorphic mylonites are well preserved, but their ages are poorly constrained.  The present interpretation favours a Late Cretaceous to Paleocene age relating to compressional tectonics.  However, an Early Eocene age relating to extensional shearing cannot be excluded. 

 

  Can. J. Earth Sci. 26, 231 - 243 (1989) 

   Introduction  

   The Monashee decollement has been interpreted as a zone of shearing that accommodated large-scale crustal shortening during Mesozoic orogenesis (e.g., Read and Brown 1981; Okulitch 1984; Brown et al. 1986; Brown and Journeay 1987).  The decollement was subsequently reactivated by early Tertiary brittle normal faulting (Lane 1984a) related to regional extension, uplift, and quenching of isotopic systems (e.g., Mathews 1981, 1983; Parrish et al. 1985; Bardoux1985; Carr et al. 1987).  As an example of a Cordilleran metamorphic core complex (Crittenden et al. 1980; Brown and Read 1983), the Monashee Complex has been the subject of ongoing debate on the relative importance of Mesozoic shortening versus Tertiary extension in the geologic evolution of the region. 

   One model concluded that Late Jurassic to Cretaceous westward underthrusting of the deforming Cordilleran orogen by the North American craton created a crustal-scale duplex that uplifted and cooled the Monashee Complex (Brown et al. 1986).  The Monashee Decollement was interpreted as the roof thrust of the duplex, forming primarily as a result of regional shortening of Jurassic to Cretaceous age.  Regional uplift and cooling occurred primarily in the Mesozoic because of crustal duplexing, with later reactivation by modest early Tertiary extension and uplift. 

   An alternative model was based on data from the Valhalla and Okanagan complexes in southern British Columbia (Parrish and Carr 1986; Carr et al. 1987).  It differed in that the role of well-documented Eocene extension was emphasized as the mechanism of uplift and cooling of the metamorphic complex. 

   Tertiary extensional faulting of 10 - 15 km magnitude on the margins of the Monashee Complex near latitude 51 N has been interpreted previously (Read and Brown 1981; Lane 1984a; Brown and Journeay 1987).  Recent models of major Tertiary extension across the Okanagan Complex in southern British Columbia suggest extension by as much as 60 - 100 km, accommodated by ductile shearing at depth and brittle faulting at higher structural levels (Tempelman-Kluit and Parkinson 1986; Parrish and Carr 1986; but see Okulitch 1987).  These models either imply that a similar magnitude of extension occurred on the Monashee Decollement and Columbia River fault zone or require a rapid decrease in extension magnitude northward along strike. 

   The recognition of important Tertiary extension in southern British Columbia results in part from precise dating of synkinematic magmatism, which is widespread in the Okanagan and Valhalla complexes.  The magmatism is spatially, and perhaps genetically, related to major extension (e.g., Mathews 1981; Carr et al. 1987).  Conversely, the timing of displacements along the Monashee Decollement is relatively poorly constrained, correlative with a lack of important synkinematic plutonism.  A different approach is therefore required to answer the questions of when and under what conditions Mesozoic shortening was replaced by Tertiary extension. 

   This paper begins to address those questions by documenting the microstructures, metamorphic-mineral assemblages, and pressure - temperature (P - T) conditions as preserved in metasediments at the Revelstoke damsite.  During construction of the dam across the Columbia River valley, the effects of ductile shearing and brittle faulting on the Monashee Decollement and Columbia River fault zone were temporarily well exposed.  We elaborate on earlier microstructural evidence for top-to-the-east sense of shear on the decollement north of Revelstoke (see Brown and Murphy 1982) by documenting multiple kinematic criteria that are consistent over 50 km of strike length.  The microstructural and metamorphic data are then compared with the local cooling history.  From these data we evaluate the extent to which the relative importance of Mesozoic compression and Tertiary extension can be constrained. 

   Structural setting  

   Development of the orogen began in the Jurassic with the collapse of a marginal basin and obduction of a magmatic arc.  Middle Jurassic west-verging deformation shortened and thickened the continental-margin sedimentary prism, resulting in regional metamorphism.  That was followed by westward underthrusting of the thickened metasedimentary pile by the North American cratonic basement and the formation of a crustal-scale duplex in Late Jurassic through Cretaceous time.  Early Tertiary extension later modified the compressional orogen (see Brown et al. (1986) for a comprehensive treatment). 

  

   The Monashee Complex (Fig. 1) is exposed as a tectonic window through the overlying Selkirk Allochthon (Read and Brown 1981; Brown and Journeay 1987).  Structural geometry in the hanging wall is complex as a result of polyphase deformation (e.g., Brown and Tippett 1978; Raeside and Simony 1983; Brown and Lane 1988).  The structural geometry in the footwall Monashee Complex is also complex (Read and Klepacki 1981; Hoy and Brown 1980; Journeay 1986), but neither structures nor metamorphism can be directly correlated across the Monashee Decollement to the Selkirk Allochthon (Wheeler 1965; Okulitch 1984; Journeay 1986). 

   On the west side of the complex, where the decollement dips shallowly westward, two periods of ductile thrusting (west over east) were interpreted as Late Jurassic and Late Cretaceous to Paleocene in age (Journeay 1986).   Ductile and brittle west-side-down normal faulting of presumed Eocene age reactivated the earlier mylonite zones in an extensional mode (Brown and Journeay 1987).  The transition from contraction to extension is marked on the west margin of the complex by a vergence reversal in the shear zones (Brown and Journeay 1987). 

   Because west and east margins are contiguous around the north end of the complex (Fig. 1), there must have been a contractional history on the east margin.  However, the contractional and extensional parts of the history have never been distinguished because the kinematics are the same for both.  Although brittle extensional faulting on the Columbia River Fault is unequivocally early Tertiary in age (Lane 1984b), the question of how much, if any, of the ductile fabric relates to Tertiary shearing (contractional or extensional) has not yet been addressed. 

   Kinematics  

   Mesoscopic structures  

   Detailed studies at several localities along the mylonite zone indicate a consistent, broadly east-west mylonitic extension lineation and shallow eastward- or northward-dipping mylonitic foliation (Fig. 2).  Foliations axial planar to Middle Jurassic southwest-verging folds in the hanging wall (S2) and variably oriented lineations (L2) parallel to hinge lines are progressively reoriented toward the mylonitic fabrics (S m, L m) in the decollement (Fig. 2).  Variability of the mylonitic foliation reflects syn-mylonite folding (Fig. 3).  Hinges of tight to isoclinal syn-mylonite ductile minor folds at the Revelstoke damsite form two clusters adjacent to the southeast-trending mylonitic extension lineation when plotted on an equal-area stereographic projection (Fig. 3a).  Hinges trending easterly have Z shapes viewed down-plunge and those trending southerly have S shapes, indicating a local southeastward displacement of the hanging wall. 

   Later folds, which probably represent a late increment of the ductile shearing, locally rotated the mylonitic foliation and lineation.  Such folds are well exposed in metasediments at the damsite (Fig. 4).  Axial-surface orientations are highly variable, but hinges plunge shallowly towards the east or northeast (Fig. 3b).  A weak crenulation of micas is locally observed parallel to the fold hinges but at an angle to the mylonitic stretching lineation, particularly near hinge zones.  The late structures refold earlier structures but are usually distinguishable from the earlier folds by their more open form (interlimb angles near 90) and by their round hinge zones (Lane 1984a, Fig. 7).  The folds described here are disrupted and offset by the brittle extensional-fault zone (Lane 1984a). 

   The late-stage folds are relative time markers because they deform mylonitic textures in the quartzite units, unlike the earlier tight to isoclinal minor folds where the quartz-shape fabric is axial planar.  The late folds are continuous across the damsite and involve the entire succession below the principal gouge zone of the Eocene brittle fault (Fig. 4) (Lane 1984a). 

   Microstructures  

   Samples for microstructural and petrofabric analysis were collected from the following localities: (i) Revelstoke damsite and adjacent exposures, (ii) south of La Forme Creek, (iii) south of Carnes Creek and (iv) south of Mars Creek (Fig. 2).  Localities (i) and (ii) include samples from the Monashee Complex and Clachnacudainn Slice and intervening tectonically emplaced lozenges that were possibly derived from the hanging wall.  Localities (iii) and (iv) include samples from the Monashee Complex and tectonic lozenges only, as hanging-wall Goldstream Slice phyllites and interlayered carbonates are not extensively mylonitized. 

   Mylonitic textures are best developed in the Clachnacudainn granitoids and siliceous units in the tectonic lozenges and foot-wall (Fig. 5).  Protomylonitic textures are present near the margins of the zone and in thin quartz-rich layers enclosed by less competent biotite schists.  A foliation parallel to compositional layering is defined by muscovite plates and thin solution seams containing very fine mica.  Their planarity and continuity indicate that they are local planes of relatively high strain (C planes of Berthe et al. 1979) parallel to the mylonitic shear plane (Fig. 6). 

   Biotite in the pelitic schists is recrystallized, so the mesoscopic fabric is not mylonitic (i.e., reduced in grain size in relation to the protolith) but merely anastomoses around plagioclase, garnet, or kyanite porphyroclasts.  Quartz aggregates normally define ribbons elongate in the lineation, but the grains are much coarser than quartz grains in the siliceous layers.  Irregular lobate grain boundaries and equidimensional grain shapes of quartz that locally overgrow mylonitic laminae indicate that thermally activated grain growth postdated major shearing (Fig. 7a).  However, well-developed equant to elongate subgrains and partial to nearly complete dynamic recrystallization of quartz (Figs. 6a, 7b), together with microshears in the biotite matrix (Fig. 7b), indicate a later reactivation.  Shear-band foliations (C' fabrics) are also well developed locally (e.g., Fig. 6d).  Lineations are defined in pelites by elongation of biotite aggregates.  Kyanite and sillimanite are also weakly to strongly aligned and pulled apart parallel to the lineation (Figs. 7b - 7b).  In siliceous layers the extension lineation is usually defined by dismembered porphyroclasts or aggregates of plagioclase and locally tourmaline (Fig. 8a). 
 
   Some quartz grains form ribbons with aspect rations exceeding 160:1 (Lane 1984b) Thin carbonate units are completely mylonitized, with equant grain sizes of 10 m diameter.  In single thin sections where quartz and carbonate layers are both present the grain-size reduction of carbonite is complete, yet quartz layers show protomylonitic textures. 
 
   In sections cut perpendicular to the foliation and parallel to the lineation, the sense of asymmetry of microstructures in a simple-shear-strain environment is an indicator os sense of shear (Ramsay and Graham 1970; Berthe et al. 1979; Davidson et al. 1982; Simpson and Schmid 1983; Passchier and Simpson 1986).  
 

 

   Comparative arboreal behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice, Peromyscus maniculatus   Wagner, from Isle Haute and mainland Nova Scotia  

  M. D. PULSIFER 1  

   Biology Department, Acadia University, Wolfville, N. S. , Canada B0P 1X0  
  Received May 6, 1988 

  PULSIFER, M. D., et HERMAN, T. B. 1989.  Comparative arboreal behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice, Peromyscus maniculatus   Wagner, from Isle Haute and mainland Nova Scotia.  Can. J. Zool. 67: 789 - 794. 

   Locomotor, climbing, and nesting behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus Wagner) from mainland Nova Scotia and from an isolated predator- and competitor-free island were compared in a laboratory observation room.  Locomotor activity did not differ consistently between populations, but wall-seeking was significantly greater in mainland mice.  When exposed to an artificial tree, insular mice made more climbs than mainland mice, but mainland mice climbed for longer periods.  Climbing behavior differed little between males and females in any group.  In a choice experiment, mainland mice selected elevated nest sites significantly more often than ground-level nest sites, while insular mice exhibited no preference. 

 

   Introduction  

   The deer mouse Peromyscus maniculatus occurs throughout North America in a variety of habitats.  The species is morphologically and behaviorally diverse, with some of the most divergent forms occurring on islands.  The behavioral repertoire of Peromyscus is well documented (Eisenberg 1968) and numerous interspecific comparisons exist (Horner 1954; King et al. 1968; Layne 1969; Layne and Ehrhart 1970; Wolff et al. 1983; Wolff 1985; Wolff and Durr 1986), but only a few behavioral studies (Sullivan 1977; Halpin and Sullivan 1978; Halpin 1981) have compared adjacent insular and mainland conspecific populations. 

   In the laboratory, we compared activity and climbing behavior, including nest height preference, in   P. maniculatus from Isle Haute in the Bay of Fundy and from adjacent mainland Nova Scotia.  Several   Peromyscus species, including P. maniculatus, appear morphologically and behaviorally adapted to a semiarboreal existence (Horner 1954; Taylor and McCarley 1963; King et al. 1968; Klein and Layne 1978; Tadlock and Klein 1979; Dewsbury et al. 1980; Newton et al. 1980; Stah 1980; Harney 1983).  These adaptations are usually related to habitat structure (Meserve 1976) or to selective pressures from ground-dwelling predators (Foster 1965) or competitors (M'Closkey 1976; Holbrook 1978, 1979; Newton et al. 1980; Harney 1983).  Since habitats of the mainland and island populations in our study were structurally similar, differences in arboreality or locomotor behavior between the two groups would likely reflect differences in predation or interspecific competition, or random change, between the two locations. 

   In general, behavioral differences between island and mainland populations could reflect genetic differences (selection pressures, origin, or drift) or differences in experience.  To separate the evolutionary and genetic components of these behaviors, we compared the behavior of wild-caught and captive-born mice from the two populations.  We predicted that island mice, relative to mainland mice, would be (i) more active and less evasive of open space, (ii) less arboreal, and (iii) less likely to construct aboveground nests. 

   Materials and methods  

  Deer mice were collected from Isle Haute, an isolated island plateau in the upper Bay of Fundy (4515'N, 6500'W), and on the mainland in Cumberland and Colchester counties, Nova Scotia (4520' - 4550'N, 6350' - 6455'W).  Isle Haute is similar topographically and vegetatively to the mainland study areas (Rowe 1972), but lacks the mainland complement of terrestrial quadrupedal predators and interspecific competitors.  In fact, P. maniculatus is the only terrestrial mammal resident on the island.  Extensive divergence in cranial morphometry between Isle Haute and mainland populations indicates long-term isolation of the island populations (Colquohoun 1983). 

   The laboratory colony of   P. maniculatus   at Acadia University included wild-caught and first-generation captive-born mice from both study areas.  The colony was established in 1980 and until 1984 was supplemented annually with wild-caught mice.  Few litters were conceived in the laboratory.  Rather, females that were pregnant when captured bore their young in captivity. 

   Mice were housed in male-female pairs in 28 x 17 x 13 cm polystyrene cages with stainless steel lids.  Cage floors were covered with wood shavings, and nonabsorbent cotton was supplied for nesting material.  Laboratory chow, sunflower seeds, and water were provided ad libitum.  Cages were kept in a vivarium at 17C with photo-period set at 16L:8D. 

   Two sets of experiments, climbing trials and nest height selection, were conducted within an indoor observation room measuring 2.8 x 1.6 x 2.4 m.   The observation room floor was gridded into 28 (4 x 7) 40-cm squares and was lightly covered with moistened leaves or wood shavings.  Individuals were observed through a 58 x 44 cm window of one-way glass.  The observation area was illuminated by three 40-W incandescent red lights.  During each trial, fresh water and sunflower seeds were provided ad libitum.  After each trial, the observation room and furnishings were cleaned with soap and hot water (70C) before new litter was applied to the floor. 

   In each group (i.e., Isle Haute wild-caught and captive-born, mainland wild-caught and captive-born), adult mice were randomly chosen for both experiments from a pool in which most males were nonscrotal and females were not pregnant or lactating.  In each experiment mice were used only once; however, most mice were used for both experiments. 

   Climbing trials were conducted at least 2 h after "sunset" and not later than 2 h before "sunrise."  An expanding wooden clothes rack was placed in the center of the observation area to serve as a climbing structure (Fig. 1).  This "tree" (64 x 50 x 100 cm, outside dimensions) consisted of a series of horizontal and diagonal rungs that progressed vertically.  Horizontals occurred at levels 25, 47, 73, and 100 cm above the floor.  The tree was sealed with Varathane (R), a waterproof preservative, for ease of cleaning.  Mice were placed singly inside the observation room and were observed for 30 min (three consecutive 10-min periods).  Total ground locomotor activity, i.e., number of squares travelled per unit time (ACT), number of climbing encounters, i.e., all physical contacts with the tree that resulted in a climb (CLIMB), total climbing time (seconds) on tree (TIME), and number of nonclimbing encounters, i.e., olfactory encounters or physical contacts not resulting in a climb (NCLIMB) were recorded on audio tape and later transcribed.  Total number of encounters (ENCT = CLIMB + NCLIMB), climbing time per climbing encounter (T / CLIMB), ratio of climbing encounters to nonclimbing encounters (CLRAT), and thigmotaxis or wall-seeking tendency (WSEEK = ACT / ENCT) were then calculated. 

   For the nest height selection experiment, three equally spaced nest boxes were set on a raised platform (135 x 14 x 2 cm) located in the tree 90 cm above the floor.  Three additional nest boxes were placed on the floor directly below the elevated nest sites, with a seventh box placed away from the tree in the middle of the floor.  The modified tree was placed at one end of the observation room opposite the food and water (Fig. 2). 

   Nest boxes were constructed from 13-mm plywood and measured 10 x 10 x 10 cm inside, with a removable lid and a 2.5-cm entrance-exit hole in a lower right quadrant of one of the sides.   The platform and all nest boxes were sealed with Varathane (R).  Before each trial, all nest boxes contained an equal amount of fresh nonabsorbent cotton for bedding. 

   To reduce the chances of deer mice selecting specific nest boxes because of cues other than nest location, the seven nest boxes for each trial were randomly chosen from a pool of nine and were randomly positioned on the tree. 

   Mice were chosen randomly and placed singly inside the observation room approximately 2 h before "sunrise" and left for 6 - 8 hours.  Each nest box was then examined for disturbance and presence or absence of a nest and (or) mouse.  All materials, including the tree, were thoroughly cleaned before the next trial. 

   Results were analyzed nonparametrically.  Spearman rank order correlations between each behavioral variable and the number of days in captivity were computed to test for the effects of prolonged captivity on behavior.  Friedman two-way analysis of variance (10-min blocks) was used to detect any changes in behavior over the 30-min period.  Nesting preferences were analyzed with single classification goodness of fit tests (Sokal and Rohlf 1969).  All other comparisons within and between groups were made with Mann-Whitney U-tests. 

   Results  
   Climbing trials  

   One hundred and four (with 21 mainland wild-caught, 32 island wild-caught, 32 mainland captive-born, and 19 island captive-born mice) 30-min climbing trials were performed.  Although the median number of captive days for wild-caught mice was significantly greater in island (M= 59.5) than in mainland (M= 24.5) groups (U= 230, p= 0.04), the frequency distributions of time in captivity were similar for both areas (G= 1.56, p Total number of tree encounters (ENCT), total climbing time (TIME), wall-seeking tendency (WSEEK), and climbing time per climbing encounter (T / CLIMB) were not significantly affected by prolonged captivity in mice from either location.  Ground locomotor activity (ACT), ratio of climbing encounters to nonclimbing encounters (CLRAT), and total number of climbing encounters (CLIMB) decreased significantly with extended captivity in the island population.  In mainland wild-caught deer mice, only the number of non-climbing encounters (NCLIMB) decreased significantly over a 270-day period (Table 1).  With the exception of nonclimbing encounters (Table 2), no significant differences between sexes were found within groups. 

   Both wild-caught and captive-born deer mice from Isle Haute encountered and climbed the tree significantly more often than did their mainland counterparts.  However, both mainland groups spent significantly more time on the tree per climbing encounter (Table 2).  Ground locomotor activity did not differ in the two wild-caught groups, but in captive-born groups it was significantly higher in island mice than in mainland mice (Table 2).  As well, mainland groups engaged in wall-seeking behavior significantly more than did island groups (Table 2).  The number of nonclimbing encounters was significantly higher in Isle Haute mice (males and females) than in mainland males, but not females (Table 2).  Total climbing time and the ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters were similar in island and mainland wild-caught groups. 

   In Isle Haute mice, ground locomotor activity and number of nonclimbing tree encounters were significantly greater in captive-born than in wild-caught animals (Table 3).  The number of climbing encounters and the ratio of climbing to non-climbing encounters were significantly greater in wild-caught mice.  However, total climbing time and climbing time per climbing encounter did not differ significantly between these groups.  The tendency to seek the wall was also similar in the two groups (Table 3). 

   In mainland deer mice as well, the number of climbs and ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters were significantly greater in wild-caught than in captive-born animals, but the time per climb was significantly less (Table 3). 

   Although the pattern of change in behaviors during the 30-min trials varied slightly, for most behaviors it was similar in mice from both locations (Table 4).  Birthplace had less effect on the pattern of responses of mainland deer mice during the 30-min trial than on the pattern in island deer mice.  Although wall-seeking tendency remained constant, ground locomotor activity decreased significantly for all groups during the 30-min trial.  Total number of encounters and total non-climbing encounters decreased significantly during the trials in all wild-caught groups.  In captive-born groups total number of encounters decreased in island animals but not in mainland animals; nonclimbing encounters decreased in mainland animals and island females but not island males.  Total climbing encounters and the ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters remained constant within all groups except wild-caught island mice, which experienced significant decreases in both of these behaviors.  Total climbing time increased significantly in wild-caught island and captive-born mainland mice.  As well, climbing time per climbing encounter increased in all groups except captive-born island mice (Table 4).  

   Nest height selection   

   One hundred and thirty-nine wild-caught (19 mainland, 34 Isle Haute) and captive-born (56 mainland, 30 Isle Haute) adult deer mice were tested for preference for elevated or ground-level nest sites.  In every trial all nest boxes were explored, as evidenced by soiled or disturbed cotton. 
 </I

 
   Diving patterns of California sea lions, Zalophus californianus    
  STEVEN D. FELDKAMP 1  
  Physiological Research Laboratory A-004, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA 92093, U.S.A.  AND ROBERT L. DELONG AND GEORGE A. ANTONELIS 
  Northwest and Alaska Fisheries Center, National Marine Mammal Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 7600 Sand Pt. Way, N.E., Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  
  Received August 15, 1988 

  FELDKAMP, S. D., DELONG, R.L., and ANTONELIS, G.A. 1989.  Diving patterns of California sea lions, Zalophus californianus. Can. J. Zool. 67: 872 - 883. 

   The diving patterns of 10 adult female California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) were examined during the summer breeding season on San Miguel Island, California, in 1982 and 1983 using time-depth recorders.  During 17 feeding trips, representing 40.6 days at sea, animals made over 8900 dives, the deepest of which was estimated at 274 m, while the longest was 9.9 min.  The majority of dives, however, were less than 3 min in duration and 80 m in depth.  From estimates of body oxygen stores, we predict that dives up to 5.8 min can be supported aerobically.  Therefore, cost-benefit considerations based on prey availability and encounter rate may be more important than physiological limits in shaping the foraging patterns of Zalophus.  Sea lions were active virtually throughout their time at sea, resting on the surface for only 3% of the average trip.  Peak diving frequency occurred during the twilight hours near sunrise and sunset.  Dives were frequent, however, during all hours of the day and were typically clustered into bouts that lasted a mean (+/- SD) of 3.3 +/- 1.5h.  We suggest that these bouts represent active feeding on discrete prey patches.  During short bouts ( During longer bouts, dive depth changed in a manner consistent with pursuit of vertically migrating prey.  During the 1983 El Nino, sea lions compensated for a reduction in food availability by lengthening dive bouts.  These seasonal and diel variations in diving patterns suggest that the rate of prey encounter strongly influences the depth and duration of individual dives. 

 

   Introduction  

   Unlike terrestrial predators, the foraging activities of aquatic mammals take place during breath hold.  Feeding depths and time available for search, pursuit, and prey capture are limited by oxygen stores available upon submergence.  These constraints undoubtedly influence the decision rules used by aquatic predators in locating and pursuing prey.  However, physiological limits to breath hold may not be the most important factor shaping the diving patterns of foraging marine mammals.  Instead, energetic cost-benefit considerations based on prey availability and encounter rates may have a more pronounced effect.  Recent data indicate that many fur seal species rarely approach the calculated limits of dive depth and duration (Gentry et al. 1986a).  Their dives are normally shallow and of short duration.  Consistent, diel variations in dive patterns also suggest that prey availability and location strongly influence the depth and duration of individual dives.  Within absolute physiological limits, there may be considerable flexibility in the ways that marine mammals find and pursue prey. 

   Theoretical treatments of foraging by terrestrial predators have described a number of alternative strategies that animals in different habitats should use to maximize their net rate of energy intake (Schoener 1971; Pyke et al. 1977; Krebs 1978; Orians and Pearson 1979).  For aquatic mammals, however, only Dunstone and O'Connor (1979a, 1979b) have addressed the question of foraging optimization.  They investigated the trade-off between the benefits of continued search and the cost of losing the prey because of oxygen depletion during pursuit by the mink (Mustela vison).  The results of these studies demonstrated that search and pursuit times were negatively correlated, but that oxygen limits accounted for considerably less of the variation in hunting patterns than did optimal foraging considerations based on prey encounter rates. 

   Empirical evidence of the interactions between marine mammals and their prey, which might be used to test predictions of optimal breath-hold foraging, is lacking.  Recent advances in recording instruments, however, now permit the collection of data on the behavior of foraging animals.  As a result, information on several marine mammal and bird species is now available and provides a basis with which to compare their diving and feeding patterns (Kooyman 1981; Kooyman et al. 1982; Nagy et al. 1984; Croxall et al. 1985; Gentry et al. 1986a; Le Boeuf et al. 1988).  Constraints imposed by an animal's physiology, morphology, and habitat and the energetic decision rules common to aquatic predators can be clarified by these comparisons. 

   The California sea lion (Zalophus californianus) is an ideal subject for studies of diving behavior.  Its large size provides an interesting comparison to previous studies of smaller fur seals (Gentry et al. 1986a).  Like other otariid pinnipeds, sea lions make repeated trips to sea during the breeding season, returning each time to suckle their pups.  This enables the deployment and retrieval of dive recorders.  Because they must return with sufficient energy to nourish their pups during their brief onshore fast, there is no doubt that feeding occurs during these offshore periods (Costa 1986). 

   In this study, we examined the diving patterns of female sea lions during these foraging trips.  Although no information was obtained on prey availability, inferences based on optimal foraging predictions were made as to the factors that might influence the observed behavior.  Average dive durations were compared with predicted values to assess the effects of oxygen limitations on feeding patterns.  Comparisons with other species, for which similar data are available, give insights into the foraging constraints imposed by the environment and those that reflect functional limits. 

   Methods  

   This study was conducted at San Miguel Island, California (34N; 12025'W).  Time-depth recorders (TDRs) were deployed on nine lactating, adult California sea lions between mid-July and mid-August 1982, and on five animals during mid-July 1983. 

   The TDR is a 500-g mechanical device that records, in real time, the depth and duration of every dive an animal makes over a 2-week period.  A complete description of this 5 x 20 cm instrument is given by Kooyman et al. (1983) and Gentry and Kooyman (1986).  Dives, along with time marks are recorded on photographic film by a light-emitting diode (LED) mounted on a movable, pressure sensitive bourdon tube.  Only dives greater than 10 m in depth and 30 s in duration can be resolved.  Before deployment and after recovery, all TDRs were calibrated to a maximum depth of 207 m using a portable pressure station. 

   The appearance of the LED trace can also provide an indirect measure of activity (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  Along with dives that appear as pointed traces on the film, the baseline (recorded when the animal is on the surface) may be either broad and wavy, or narrow and flat (Fig. 1).  A broad baseline is caused by movement or chatter of the bourdon tube arm, and we interpret this trace to indicate surface swimming.  Similarly, we interpret a flat baseline as representing inactivity of the animal or its resting on the surface.  From these images a time budget of the animal's activities at sea can be constructed (Fig. 1). 

   Sea lions that were observed nursing a pup were captured with hoop nets and physically immobilized using a large restraint board with a detachable neck brace (Gentry and Holt 1982).  TDRs were fastened to each animal with a harness constructed from straps of 2.5 cm wide tubular nylon webbing (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  A very high frequency (VHF) radio transmitter (5 cm length x 2 cm diameter; Advanced Telemetry Systems) was also attached to the harness to facilitate locating the animal on shore.  When animals returned from sea they were recaptured, the TDR removed, and the animal released. 

   Analysis  

   Upon recovery, the film was developed and enlarged.  Dive traces and timing marks were digitized and printouts obtained of the time each dive occurred, its depth, duration, and length of the following surface interval (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  During analysis, it became clear that dives occurred in clusters, separated by comparatively long surface intervals.  To analyze these dive bouts, we established their ending points in time using a bout-ending criterion (BEC) that was determined by constructing surface interval - survivorship curves (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  For each animal, the number of post-dive surface intervals with a duration greater than a given time t was plotted logarithmically against t on the ordinate (Fig. 2).  This formed a decreasing function with a slope proportional to the probability of a surface interval of given duration occurring at any time after the last surface interval recorded (Fagen and Young 1978).  A break in the slope, therefore, signifies a change in the probability of surface interval occurrence. 

   For each animal two inflection points were observed: one at 2 to 3 min and the other between 7 and 11 min (Fig. 2).  Following the procedures outlined in Gentry and Kooyman (1986), the second point was chosen to represent the BEC.  To further define a bout, the minimum number of dives was arbitrarily set at 10.  A dive bout, therefore, consisted of 10 or more dives not separated by a surface period exceeding the BEC. 

   Dive bouts were analyzed separately for mean dive depth, duration, and surface interval length.  Interbout intervals were calculated as time from the last dive in a bout until the first dive of the next.  Transit times to and from the feeding grounds were established by calculating the time from shore departure to the first dive bout and that spent in returning to land from the last dive bout. 

   Activity budgets were constructed from records with clear swimming and resting traces.  Time spent swimming was determined as all surface activity excluding resting and time spent on the surface between dives occurring within bouts.  During a dive bout, surface intervals between dives were generally brief and likely did not indicate travel, but instead were associated with replenishing 0 2 stores.  Time spent diving was calculated as the total time that the animal was submerged.  Sea lions were considered resting when the dive trace appeared flat (Fig. 1). 

   To calculate distance travelled from the amount of time spent swimming, estimates were made of both swim speed and the instrument's hydrodynamic impact (Appendix).  These calculations indicate that adult sea lions should travel at an average velocity of 2.5 m/s (9 km/h) when carrying the TDR package.  Empirical data collected on other otariid species of differing body size, however, suggest that this value may be slightly high owing to the assumption of similar relative transport costs between juveniles and adults (P. J. Ponganis, personal communication).  The average velocity of 9 km/h should therefore be viewed as approximate and the calculated foraging ranges regarded as maximum estimates. 

   Results  

   In 1982, all nine animals returned to shore with the instrument package.  One TDR failed, so that eight diving records were obtained (ZC-5 through ZC-12).  In 1983, only two of the five animals returned to the study site (ZC-17 and ZC-20).  A total of 10 dive records was therefore obtained from individual animals.  Because several of the animals made more than one trip to sea prior to recapture, a total of 17 feeding trips was recorded (Table 1).  On 6 of these, film in the TDR ran out while the animal was still at sea.  On 11 of the trips, the return to shore was recorded. 

   Since all animals carried radio tags, it was possible to tell when they returned to San Miguel Island.  However, records clearly showed that two animals (ZC-10 and ZC-17) were on land for periods ranging from 12 to 33 h although they did not return to the study site.  Nevertheless, because offshore rocks and other islands occur near San Miguel, these onshore periods are taken to represent the end of a trip to sea. 

   Performance  

   Over 8900 dives were logged in 40.6 recorded days at sea.  The trace of the deepest dive, although completely recorded on the film, exceeded the calibration of the instrument and was estimated at 274 m (ZC-9; Table 1) by assuming a linear correlation between pressure and the distance travelled by the recording arm.  
 </I
