  

          Reduction of wasp (Hymenoptera: Vespidae)
populations by poison-baiting&semi; experimental use of sodium
monofluoroacetate (1080) in canned sardine      
        Abstract       Poison-baiting
trials were carried out in Canterbury, Nelson, and Westland in
1986/87 to 1989/90 to reduce wasp (predominantly   Vespula
vulgaris  ) populations.   Compound 1080 was mixed with canned
sardine in aspic jelly for bait.   Bait stations were put out in
areas of 1.5-3 ha, at a density of about 40/ha.   Wasps were
pre-fed with non-toxic bait for at least 3 days before
poisoning.  
    Poison-baits containing 0.001% and 0.01% 1080 had no
significant effect on wasp traffic at nest entrances, 0.1% 1080
reduced wasp traffic by 17%, 0.5% 1080 by 78%, and 1% 1080 by 89%.
  Reduction in wasp numbers after poisoning with 0.5% or 1% 1080
was rapid, up to 100% within 6 h.   The level of reduction
declined beyond 100 m from bait stations.   After poisoning, wasp
traffic at nests within 100 m of bait stations remained low for the
rest of the season, but partially recovered at nests more than 100
m from baits.   Wasp numbers visiting bait stations containing
non-toxic baits increased to about 30% of pre-poison levels 4 weeks
after poisoning.   These wasps must have come from nests more
than 100 m from bait stations.  
    Although 1080 in sardine baits effectively reduced wasp
populations in local areas, a concentration of 0.5-1.0% was
required.   The hazard to non-target species was reduced by the
bait being confined in bait stations and exposed for less than 6 h.
  However, 1080 is highly toxic to vertebrates, especially dogs,
which imposes restrictions on its use.   Alternative poisons that
are less toxic than 1080 to non-target species need to be
found.  
        INTRODUCTION      
    Two species of introduced wasps, the common wasp
(  Vespula vulgaris  ) and the German wasp (  V.
germanica  ) (Hymenoptera: Vespidae) cause problems in forestry,
beekeeping, horticulture, and tourism/recreation industries in New
Zealand because of their great numbers, scavenging habit, and
painful (rarely fatal) sting (Thomas 1960&semi; Perrott 1975&semi; Walton &amp;
Reid 1976&semi; Donovan 1985&semi; Moller et al. 1987&semi; Clapperton et al.
1989).   Problems are worst in February and March when wasp
numbers are highest.   Wasps may also be upsetting the ecological
balance of forests by predation on native insects and by
competition for food with insects and birds (Moller et al. 1987).
  There are even reports of wasps killing nestling birds (Moller
1990&semi; Read et al. 1990).  
    Wasp numbers can be reduced by destroying colonies in nests
using petrol or contact insecticides such as actellic dust or
carbaryl.   However, nests are not easy to find.   Wasp numbers
can also be reduced by laying poison-bait (Wagner &amp; Reierson 1969).
  Foraging worker wasps collect the poison-bait and carry it to
their nests, where they feed it to the larvae, queen, and other
workers.  
    Poison-baits for wasps consist usually of an insecticide
mixed with fish or meat.   Sugar-based baits are unsuitable
because they are attractive to honey bees (  Apis
mellifera  ).   Various organochlorine, organophosphate, and
carbamate insecticides mixed with fish or meat baits have been
tested on   V. vulgaris   and a related species of wasp
(  V. pensylvanica  ) in the U.S.A. (Grant et al. 1968&semi;
Wagner &amp; Reierson 1969).   Two organochlorines, mirex and
chlordane, gave effective control of wasps over areas of up to 40
ha.   Because the use of organochlorine insecticides became
restricted, Ennik (1973) investigated the use of encapsulated
diazinon and "Rabon" (both organophosphates).   Both reduced wasp
numbers by 75-95% after 2 days.   Chang (1988) also achieved
effective control of wasps using encapsulated diazinon.  
    Mirex, the only insecticide that has been scientifically
evaluated for use in poison-baits for wasp control in New Zealand,
substantially reduced wasp numbers in a resort area in the
Marlborough Sounds (Perrott 1975).   However, poison-baiting with
mirex has not always been successful (Walton &amp; Reid 1976, various
personal communications).   Mirex is not registered as a
pesticide in this country, and it has now been banned in the USA.
  A replacement has not yet been found.  
    Compound 1080 (sodium monofluoroacetate) is not commonly
regarded as an insecticide but has been used experimentally as such
overseas&semi; e.g., David (1950) found that 0.001% 1080 applied to
plants killed aphids.   It was first used experimentally as a
wasp poison in New Zealand in 1980 (unknown concentration in raw
minced beef, C. Eves, pers. comm.), apparently with good
results.  
    This paper reports results of research requested by the
former New Zealand Forest Service and the Department of
Conservation to substantiate the effectiveness of 1080 and to
provide information for its registration with the Pesticides Board
as an insecticide in baits for wasp control.  
        STUDY AREAS      
    Most of the research was done from 1986/87 to 1988/89 in Mt
Thomas Forest, North Canterbury, South Island, New Zealand, where
large numbers of wasps had been reported in picnic areas and along
forest tracks.   The forest is partly planted with introduced
conifers (  Pinus radiata   and   Pseudotsuga
menziesii  ), but also contains extensive areas of mountain
beech (  Nothofagus solandri   var.
  cliffortioides  ).   The beech trees are heavily infested
with the scale insect,   Ultracoelostoma assimile  , which
produces honeydew, used by wasps and some of their prey as a food
resource.   Most wasp nests were found in the ground at the edge
of the beech forest, and most (97%) belonged to   V.
vulgaris  .   In places, there were as many as 75 wasp
nests/ha.  
    In 1989/90, field trials were extended, with the assistance
of the Department of Conservation and the Ministry of Forestry, to
other northern South Island beech forests, where the predominant
wasp species was also   V. vulgaris  .  
        METHODS      
        Bait preparation      
    On the basis of preliminary bait-preference tests (E. B.
Spurr, unpubl. data), canned sardine cat-food in aspic jelly
(Wonder Cat, packed by Pataya Food Industries Ltd, Samutsakorn,
Thailand) was used for bait.  
    Poison-baits were prepared in the laboratory.   The 1080
powder (either Fike or Tenate brand) was dissolved in water, dyed
with 0.01% Acid Brilliant Green, and then mixed with the canned
sardine.   Before 1989/90, the poison-bait was frozen in 50 g
plastic pottles ready for putting in bait stations.   In 1989/90,
poison-bait was frozen in 400 g plastic tubes ready to be put in
bait stations with bait-guns.   Baits were thawed the day before
use.  
    Bait stations were made from cans or plastic bottles (50-75
mm diameter) open at one end and tied horizontally to wooden stakes
1.2 m above ground.   Initially, the open end was covered with
plastic bird netting, but because birds were not attracted to bait
stations the netting was not used in later trials.  
        Field trials      
    Areas of 1.5-3 ha in forest clearings or along tracks were
selected for poison-baiting trials.   Because most wasps travel
less than 200 m to food sources (Edwards 1980), areas were
separated by at least 500 m to reduce interference between
treatments.  
    On the basis of preliminary trials (which showed that the
greater the number of bait stations the more wasps collected bait)
bait stations were located about 10 m apart around the periphery
and on transects through areas to be treated, at a density of about
40/ha.   Where possible, bait stations were placed in sunny
locations because these attracted more wasps than those in the
shade.  
    Non-toxic baits were put out for at least 3 days before
poison-baits to attract wasps to the bait stations and to determine
when the level of bait acceptance was high enough to warrant
putting out poison-baits.   Poison-baits were put out only when
more than five wasps (on average) were feeding simultaneously from
each non-toxic bait.   Sometimes wasps had developed a feeding
frenzy for the non-toxic baits, during which more than 50 wasps
would be feeding simultaneously from a single bait.   This
generally occurred only after 2-3 days of fine weather and only
during January-April when wasp populations were greatest.  
     On the day of poisoning, 50 g poison-baits were placed in
bait stations by about 1000 h and replenished
  graph: Fig. 1    caption  
 as necessary.   Concentrations of 0.001%, 0.01%, 0.1%, and 0.5%
1080 were each used in one operation and 1% 1080 was used in 12
operations between 1986/87 and 1989/90.    
        Monitoring wasp populations      
    Wasp populations were monitored before and after poisoning
operations and compared with wasp populations in non-poison areas,
by counting:
    a.    The number of wasps in 1 min. (i.e.,
wasp traffic rate) leaving or entering nests (one count per nest
between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. NZST,   n   = 10-92
nests/operation, monitored for 4-16 weeks before and after
poisoning operations).   
    b.    The number of wasps simultaneously
present on non-toxic baits (average of three counts between 10 a.m.
and 4 p.m. NZST,   n   = 30-60 baits/operation, monitored for
3 days to 5 weeks before and after poisoning operations).   
    c.    The number of wasps simultaneously
present on poison-baits (counts at 0.5-1 h intervals until the
baits were removed after about 6 h,   n   = 30-60
baits/operation).     
    The wasp traffic rate gives an index of the wasp population
resident in the area being surveyed.   The number of wasps
counted on non-toxic baits gives an index of the total number of
wasps (residents and non-resident visitors) in the area, and the
number of wasps present on toxic baits gives a measure of the rate
of reduction in the wasp population on the day of poisoning.  
    The extent of reduction in wasp traffic was assessed from
counts made 1-2 days before and after poisoning, from the formula,
1 - after count/before count at each nest.   Data were normalised
using a   ln   (  x   + 1) transformation and tested by
analysis of variance for the effects of 1080 concentration and
distance from baits.   Least significant differences were
calculated from the formula given by Andrews et al. (1980).
  Means and upper and lower significance limits were
back-transformed for graphing.   A significance level
(&alpha;) of 0.05 was used in all calculations.  
        RESULTS      
    Poisoning operations using 0.001% and 0.01% 1080 had no
significant effect on the number of wasps leaving or entering
nests, poisoning with 0.1% 1080 reduced wasp numbers by an average
of 17%, 0.5% 1080 by 78%, and 1% 1080 by 89% (Fig. 1).   The
difference between the effect of 0.5% and 1% 1080 on wasp traffic
was significant (  F   = 35.629, df = 1,   P   &lt;
0.001).   With 1% 1080, there was no significant
difference between the reduction in wasp traffic at nests of
  V. vulgaris   (89%,   n   = 297) and   V.
germanica   (89%,   n   = 11) (  F   = 0.018, df =
1,   P  &gt; 0.05).   There were too few
  V. germanica   nests to compare with   V. vulgaris  
at other concentrations of 1080.  
    The reduction in wasp numbers after poisoning with 0.5% and
1% 1080 was rapid.   The number of wasps collecting poison-bait
decreased by 86% 2 h after poison-baits were put out (Fig. 2).
  This was a result of mortality, not avoidance of the bait,
because some baits were totally removed and had to be replenished.
  Also, at most nests within 100 m of bait stations, wasp traffic
was heavily reduced (and at some declined to zero) within 6 h of
poisoning.   Dead wasps were found on baits, on the ground, and
at nest entrances on the day of poisoning, but most were found
inside nests when they were dug up several days later.   For a
few days after poison-baiting, workers at surviving nests were seen
carrying dead larvae out of the nest.  
    Poisoning with 0.5-1% 1080 reduced wasp numbers in nests at
least 300 m away from bait stations (Fig. 3).   However, the
effect of poison-baiting declined with distance from bait stations
(  F   = 16.746, df = 5,   P   &lt;
0.001).   The average reduction 1-2 days
  graph: Fig. 2    caption  
  graph: Fig. 3    caption  
 after poisoning was 88% at nests within 100 m of baits
(  n   = 330) compared to 35% at nests 100-300 m from baits
(  n   = 56).   All wasps died in 56% of the nests within
100 m of baits, but in only 14% of the nests 100-300 m away.
  Wasp populations in less than 5% of nests within 100 m of baits
were apparently unaffected by poisoning.   These nests were all
on the boundary, not in the centre, of poison areas.   The main
flight path of wasps from these nests tended to be away from the
line of bait stations.   One such nest was only about 2 m from
one in which all wasps died.  
    After poisoning with 0.5-1% 1080, wasp numbers at nests
within 100 m of bait stations remained low for the rest of the
season, but partially recovered at nests more than 100 m away (Fig.
4).   The recovery was less at nests 100-200 m from bait stations
than at nests 200-300 m away.   The decline in wasp numbers at
nests 100-300 m from bait stations 5 weeks after putting out
poison-baits was greater than the natural seasonal decline in nests
more than 500 m from bait stations.  
    Wasp nests which survived the first few days after
poisoning died out earlier than nests in non-poison areas.   Five
weeks after poisoning, all wasps had died in 69% of nests within
100 m of baits (  n   = 79), but only in 2% of nests more
than 500 m away (  n   = 159), and 12 weeks after poisoning,
all wasps had died in 94% of nests within 100 m of baits, but only
in 6% of nests more than 500 m away.  
    As a result of poison-baiting, nests in poison areas were
significantly smaller and contained significantly fewer queen cells
than nests in non-poison areas (E. B. Spurr, unpubl. data).  
    The number of wasps visiting non-toxic baits put out in
poison areas to monitor the wasp nuisance declined by more than 95%
1 day after poison operations.   This is greater than the
reduction in the number of wasps leaving or entering nests,
probably because wasps foraging on baits are the ones most directly
affected by poisoning.   However, like the recovery in the number
of wasps at nests more than
  graph: Fig. 4    caption  
  graph: Fig. 5    caption  
 100 m from bait stations, 4 weeks after poison-baiting the number
of wasps visiting non-toxic baits had increased to about 30% of
pre-poison levels (Fig. 5).   Poisoning was equally successful
whether carried out in January, February, or March (Fig. 6).
  However, January poisoning provided the longest period of
relief from wasps.  
        DISCUSSION      
    The concentration of 1080 in baits required to kill
individual wasps is &lt; 0.001% (E. B. Spurr, unpubl.
data).   However, the concentration required to kill whole
populations of wasps in nests is considerably greater than this,
and presumably is related to the amount of poison-bait carried into
the nest per unit time.   With the present method of
poison-baiting, 1% 1080 is required to achieve an 89% reduction in
wasp populations within 100 m of bait stations.   It is doubtful
that increasing the concentration of 1080 would reduce wasp
populations further.   The reason why some wasps survived poison
operations is more likely to be insufficient bait getting into the
nest than insufficient poison in the bait.   One factor affecting
the amount of bait carried to nests may be the location of bait
stations in relation to flight paths of wasps.   Another factor
may be the limited time wasps have to collect bait before they die
(&lt;2 h with 1% 1080).  
    In these trials I attempted to increase the amount of bait
carried to nests in two ways.   First, I used a much higher
density of bait stations (40/ha) than in previously published
studies (&lt;1/ha), to increase the chances of wasps
encountering baits.   A high density of bait stations also
compensates for the difficulty of predicting the flight paths of
wasps.   Second, I pre-fed with non-toxic baits to give wasps
time to find baits,
  graphs: Fig. 6    caption  
 thereby increasing the number of wasps collecting bait, and
consequently the amount of bait collected per unit time.   The
bait station density and amount of pre-feeding required probably
depends on whether the wasp density is high or low, and whether the
poison site is a picnic area in a forest clearing or a narrow track
through forest.   The lower the wasp density and the narrower the
area the greater the density of baits and amount of pre-feeding
required.   In one trial, in an open area with a dense wasp
population, 1 poison-bait/ha reduced the wasp traffic at nests by
95% (E. B. Spurr 1990, unpubl. FRI contract report).  
    The amount of bait collected by wasps could be increased by
using a more attractive bait.   Sardine cat-food attracts more
wasps than any other bait I have tested so far.   However,
further research is needed to make baits more attractive to wasps,
particularly early in the season, perhaps by incorporating prey- or
plant-injury volatiles (e.g., Aldrich et al. 1985) or wasp
pheromones (e.g., Heath &amp; Landolt 1988).  
    The post-poison increase in number of wasps on non-toxic
baits, but not at nests within 100 m of bait stations, indicates
that wasps foraged from nests more than 100 m away.   The
proportional increase in number of wasps on baits was not as great
as that of wasp traffic at nests more than 200 m from bait
stations, indicating that most of the invading wasps came from
100-200 m away.   This indicates that poison-baits should be put
in buffer zones around areas to be protected.   The width of such
buffer zones should be related to the distance wasps will travel to
food.   Little information is available on this topic.
  Although most wasps travel less than 200 m to food sources
(Edwards 1980), they may travel further when food is scarce,
especially if a food source is available that is not being used, as
after a poison-baiting operation.   I suggest that buffer zones
should be about 200 m wide, but further experimentation is required
to verify this.  
    An alternative or maybe additional tactic to poison-baiting
in buffer zones may be a follow-up poisoning with at least some
baits in different locations to those in the first operation.
  This may kill any wasps that survived because baits were not in
their flight path.   A follow-up operation 2 weeks after the
first may also kill wasps that escaped the initial poisoning as
pupae (which are non-feeding) (Ennik 1973).  
    My trial sites were all small (&lt;3 ha),
involving &lt;120 baits, but the principles apply over
larger areas.   Some subsequent management operations have
covered more than 30 ha, involving more than 1200 baits, with
equally successful results (A.E. Newton, pers. comm.).   Other
management operations have not been successful because of
insufficient pre-feeding, too few wasps collecting bait, or wet
weather preceding and/or during the operations (E. B. Spurr 1990,
unpubl. FRI contract report).  
    Poisoning should be done as soon as wasps readily accept
bait (early January in North Canterbury).   The earlier poisoning
is done, the longer the period of relief from wasps.   However,
the timing of both nest initiation and bait acceptance indicate
that poisoning should not be done before the end of December.
  In one trial in early December, poison-baits containing 1% 1080
attracted few wasps and failed to prevent the wasp population
reaching a peak in mid February as normal (E. B. Spurr, 1990
unpubl. FRI contract report).   Better results may be possible if
a synthetic long-lasting bait was available that could be put out
early in the season and remain attractive to wasps for at least 2-3
weeks (unlike sardine, which is attractive for only 2-3 days).  
    There is no evidence that poison-baiting affects wasp
numbers in subsequent years.   Although poison-baiting results in
fewer new queens being produced because fewer nests survive, this
is compensated for by invasion of queens from outside poison areas.
  Thus, poison-baiting needs to be done annually.  
    The risk of poisoning non-target insect populations is
reduced by using a protein bait that attracts few insects other
than wasps, by exposing baits for only a short time (&lt;6 h),
and by confining them within bait stations.   This
also reduces the risk to birds.   Research is underway to
determine the hazard of dead wasps and larvae to birds and other
non-target species.   The main risk of wasp poisoning operations
is to dogs and cats, which may be attracted to the sardine bait.
  Compound 1080 is highly toxic to vertebrates (the
LD  50   of 1080 to laboratory rats is 0.2 mg/kg, whereas
that for mirex is 306 mg/kg).   Dogs are particularly susceptible
to 1080 (LD  50   0.07 mg/kg) and need to eat only a
pea-sized piece of bait to receive a lethal dose.   Such a small
amount may be dropped on the ground without being noticed by the
operator, and may remain lethal to dogs for several weeks.
  Thus, when 1080 is used in picnic sites or other public areas,
it must be used with extreme care.   It is a controlled pesticide
and can be applied only by approved operators (Pesticides Act 1979&semi;
Vertebrate Pest Control Regulations 1983).  
    Alternative insecticides exist that are less toxic than
1080 to non-target vertebrate species and are also non-repellent to
target species.   For example, hydramethylnon has been used in
baits for ant control in the USA (Davidson &amp; Stone 1989) and is
non-repellent to   V. germanica   (Reid &amp; MacDonald 1986).
  Chang (1988) considered it the most effective of the chemicals
he tested against   V. pensylvanica  .   Because of the
risks involved with using 1080, preliminary research on
hydramethylnon and other poisons for wasp control (E. B. Spurr
1989, unpubl. FRI contract report) should be continued.    
  

          Life history.       The
life cycle of   O. novaezealandiae   is univoltine:
nymphs emerge in spring and mature in summer&semi; adults mate and
produce eggs in autumn, and die off at the onset of winter.
  The majority of the population is more or less at a
similar stage at any particular time.   Egg-laying commences
in February (January according to Potts 1884, April according
to Suckling 1978) and continues through to April and May, or
as long as the females survive.   In the laboratory females
continue laying long after their sisters in the wild have died
(Suckling 1978).   Potts recorded that one female produced
five or six oothecae&semi; Suckling recorded two or more
oothecae per female and, in one instance, five.   This
number is low in comparison with that of   Stagmomantis
carolina  , for which Breland (1941b) found the average of
eight captive females to be greater than seven, with a maximum
of fourteen.  
    The earliest any first-instar nymphs have been found
in the wild is May in Auckland (Bennett 1981) and mid August
in Nelson (NN).   However, also in Nelson E.W. Valentine
(unpublished data) recorded that a few nymphs emerge in June
and July, slightly more in August, and the vast majority
during September and October, after which hatching ceases
abruptly.   Many appear during September, and some have been
found as late as January.  
    Adults are present from February onwards.   The
earliest an adult has been seen is February, but they are not
present in numbers until late February, and particularly
during March, when they are most abundant.   Their numbers
start falling off in May, and most adults have disappeared by
the beginning of June or earlier (first week of May on the
Taieri Plains, Dunedin (DN) - A.C. Harris, pers. comm.).
  That this is the result of cooler temperatures is attested
to by the fact that adults taken into the laboratory from the
wild survive and produce more oothecae for some time after
their siblings in the wild have disappeared (Suckling 1978).
  Males are the first to disappear, and a few females may
overwinter and survive even up until the following
November (Crosby 1984).   Females begin producing
oothecae during March, and continue for as long as they
survive.  
    The interval from laying to hatching is normally 5-6
months.   However, Suckling (1978) found the period to vary
from only 35 days to 53 days for laboratory-reared specimens,
and this is corroborated by Bennett (1981), who reported
nymphs emerging after 73 days from an ootheca laid in the
laboratory in June.   In general in the wild eggs laid
during April do not hatch until September at the earliest, so
development requires at least 150 days.   An exception to
this is the example of an overwintering female in Auckland
which produced an ootheca between August and October from
which the nymphs had emerged by November (Crosby 1984), a
possible maximum of some 90 days only.   Nymphs have been
reported emerging in autumn (Crosby 1984).  
    The time taken for egg development in both New
Zealand species is unusually long, but may be normal for
species living in temperate climates.  
    In France and Europe the eggs of   Mantis
religiosa   and   Ameles   sp. take approximately
nine months before hatching (Fabre 1894, Sharp 1895),
whereas in seven tropical species the period is short, varying
from 13 to 51 days, with two species having a maximum of 31
days and one 25 days (Ene 1962, 1964, Kumar 1973).   The
same is true of Indian mantids, in which one species required
20 days to develop, a   Mantis   sp. 18 days, and
  Schizocephala bicornis   30 days (Wood-Mason 1878b).
  Adair (1914a), in Egypt, found that   Miomantis
savignyi   required an average of 27.5 days (range 18-38),
  Sphodromantis bioculata   57 days (range 41-78),
  Blepharis mendica   34 days (range 30-40), and (in
1914b)   Mantis religiosa   an average of 33.75 days
(range 31-51).   Warmer temperatures accelerate development
(Ene 1964), and Faure (1940) found the average incubation for
a South African species to be 31 days in summer and 62 days in
winter.   Adair (1914b) found that   M. religiosa  
eggs took 31-33 days to develop in early autumn and 48-51 days
in early winter.     M. religiosa   thus exemplifies
this very strongly when the subtropical data from Egypt are
compared with the temperature data from the northern
limits of its distribution - nine months.   Further, since
mantids are generally tropical/subtropical insects, it is not
surprising that the time taken for egg development in species
at the northern and southern extremes of mantid occurrence is
unusually long.  
    It is probable that development of the egg of   O.
novaezealandiae   is triggered by a temperature effect
(see Zaslavski 1988), as all eggs of an ootheca usually hatch
within a day or two of each other, although the oothecae
themselves may be at different stages of development even in
the same area.   Suckling (1978) studied 150 oothecae of
  O. novaezealandiae   in Palmerston North (WI-WN)
and found that in 84 of them (56%) all the nymphs had emerged
within 24 hours of each other&semi; in another 28 (19%) all the
nymphs had emerged within 3 days of each other&semi; and in the
remaining 38 (25%) the nymphs emerged within 11 days of each
other.   E.W. Valentine (unpublished data) found that in
Nelson most oothecae had completely hatched within 3-4 days,
the majority emerging on the same day from any one ootheca.
  In a few instances the hatching period was extended to
11 or even 17 days.    
        Overwintering    .   In
general, in temperate regions, mantids pass the winter in the
egg stage (Gurney 1951).     Orthodera
novaezealandiae   is no exception to this.   However,
in suitable places - probably localities with a warm
microclimate - it is able to overwinter in the wild as nymphs
and adults, as well as in the egg, the usual overwintering
stage.   Crosby (1984) found third-instar nymphs in May,
fifth instars in late July, and sixth instars in
September-October&semi; adults developed from them in
November.   One of these, a male, was observed mating
with an overwintered female from the preceding generation
(usually only females overwinter).   There are 16
records of adult mantids being found during June (including
one from Stokes Valley (WN), two from Wellington (WN), and one
from Te Puke (BP)), one for July, five for August
(including one from Hamilton (WO)), two for September, two
for October, and two for November - all from Auckland (AK),
except as specified.   Crosby (1984) concludes that it is
likely that adults and nymphs of   O. novaezealandiae  
regularly overwinter in Auckland in low numbers, and that
this probably occurs in the wider Auckland region and in
Northland (ND) also.   Survival may be dependent on warm
daytime temperatures, as at the southern limits of the
  species'   range in New Zealand it thrives in Cromwell
(CO), where the winter daytime temperatures are warm, but not
in Dunedin or Southland (SL), where they are not.  
        Oothecae     are laid on walls,
fence posts, branches, twigs, and so on, in fact on any
reasonably flat, firm surface, but are never squeezed into
cracks or folds.   Shelter does not appear to have much
influence on the female 's choice of oviposition site.
  Suckling (1978) examined 150 oothecae from the Palmerston
North area and found that their dimensions were in the
range 4.55-8.80 mm (usually 5.50-6.60 mm) high, 4.00-7.00 mm
(usually 6.00-6.50 mm) wide, and 8.00-18.75 mm (usually
10.00-12.00 mm) long.   Except for one example from
Titirangi, Auckland which was 23.00 mm long, one example from
Point Chevalier, Auckland, which was only 7.5 mm long, and the
width dimension of 3.0 mm recorded by Ward (1969), the
dimensions of the oothecae examined during this study and
those of Ward (1969) fall within these limits.   No
malformed oothecae have been found, apart from one very small
example, almost a fragment, which probably resulted from the
mother being disturbed.  
    Oothecae (Fig. 7,39,40) are rich, dark brown with a
thin surface layer of scattered, irregular-sized vesicles,
rather like a thin, pale-coloured, dispersed, glistening foam.
  Orifices are closed by a thick, flat layer of fine,
bright, cream-coloured foam which comprises the conspicuous
stripe along the top of the ootheca.   In some instances
this may disintegrate before the nymphs emerge.   The
narrow shape is constant whatever the form of the surface on
which the ootheca is laid - the sides with vertical sloped
ribs, the commencing (posterior) end irregularly rounded, and
the terminating (anterior) end sloped like the sides.   The
orifices are arranged mid-dorsally in two rows in a
figure-of-eight configuration, and vary in number from 5 to 35
(commonly 15-25) (Suckling 1978), or from 8 to 30 (average 17)
(Ward 1969).   In the throat of each orifice a thin,
flexible, transverse valve occurs&semi; it is attached across the
posterior wall at some distance down, almost at the level of
the eggs, and completely seals off the egg chamber by passing
upwards and     fowards    forwards     so that
its border lies in close contact with the anterior wall.
  Such flaps or valves have been described or illustrated in
the oothecae of various species of mantid on a number of
occasions (Brongniart 1881, Fabre 1897, Giardina 1898, 1899,
Kershaw 1910, Rau &amp; Rau 1913, Williams &amp; Buxton 1916, Chopard
1938 (pp. 197-199), Breland &amp; Dobson 1947, Sharell 1971), and
are probably a general characteristic of mantid oothecae of
this type.   Thus, access to each egg chamber is protected
by this flap and by the plug of foam-like material filling the
mouth of the orifice.   The outer lip of each orifice is
more or less horizontal.  
    Each orifice leads into a transverse egg-chamber
containing a single row of eggs each contained in a
membranous cell.   The membrane of the cell is
glistening and adheres to the egg-chamber wall and to the
membrane of the contiguous cell.   The posterior wall of
each has a broad vertical strip of opaque pale-coloured
material adhering to its inner surface which may serve to grip
the egg.   The egg-chambers of each side are offset in
relation to each other, and each contains three eggs arranged
vertically.  
    Suckling (1978) suggested that only two eggs were
present within each egg chamber, and that there was no
relationship between the number of eggs and the number of
orifices.   He found the number of eggs in each transverse
row to vary between one and five.   Ward (1969) also found
only two eggs in each chamber.   However, in the present
study three was the usual number, and each transverse row,
comprising two offset egg chambers, therefore had six eggs.
  Thus there is a direct relationship between the number
of orifices, the number of egg chambers, and the number of
eggs.   Their arrangement is similar to that of
  Stagmomantis carolina   (Johansson) described by Rau &amp;
Rau (1913).  
    The total number of eggs per ootheca is very variable.
  Suckling (1978) found this to be as high as 70 and as low
as 5, with 20-40 most commonly present.   Ward (1969) found
the range to be 20-60, with an average of 40.   E.W.
Valentine (unpublished data) found in Nelson that the number
of nymphs emerging from an ootheca varied from 2 to 65, but
was mostly 24-45.   This number is low when compared with
that of   Miomantis caffra   (up to approx. 248) and
very low in comparison with 325 recorded for
  Sphodromantis lineola   (Burmeister) (Kumar 1973).
  It may indicate a lower mortality rate for   O.
novaezealandiae  .   Adair (1914a) reported between 54
and 102 nymphs emerging from a single ootheca of
  Miomantis savignyi  , up to 436 in   Sphodromantis
bioculata  , and between 32 and 88 in   Blepharis
mendica.    
    Although the form of the ootheca varies greatly in
different mantid species, its structure is basically similar.
  It has been described for   Mantis religiosa   by
Pagenstecher (1864), Brongniart (1881), Fabre (1897), and
Giardina (1898, 1899)&semi; in   Gongylus gongyloides   by
C.E. Williams (1904)&semi; in   Hierodula saussurii   by
Kershaw (1910)&semi; in   Stagmomantis carolina   by Rau &amp;
Rau (1913)&semi; in   Miomantis savignyi, Fischeria
baetica  , and   Sphodromantis bioculata   by
Adair (1914a, b), who also illustrates those of   Empusa
egena, Eremiaphila khamsin,   and   Mantis
religiosa  &semi; and in   Sphodromantis guttata   by
Williams &amp; Buxton (1916)&semi; as well, Shelford (1909) and
Waterhouse (1913) have described mantid oothecae.   The
ootheca illustrated by Chopard (1938, p. 202, fig. 201) is not
that of   orthodera ministralis   and is
misidentified.  
    The biochemistry of the ootheca of   Orthodera
novaezealandiae   and   O. ministralis   has been
studied by Giardina (1899), Heckman &amp; Goldberg (1960), Rudall
(1965), and Ward (1969).   In 1955 Parker &amp; Rudall described
small, rectangular crystals adhering to or embedded in the
protein membranes of which the mantis ootheca is formed.
  These crystals, each of which was embedded in a
complicated protein envelope, were identified as being calcium
citrate.   Heckman &amp; Goldberg (1960), working with oothecae
of   O. ministralis   from Australia, denied the
presence of calcium citrate crystals.   However, Rudall
(1965), working with their material and using their
techniques, considered that they had dissolved the crystals
before analysis, and went on to illustrate beautiful calcium
citrate crystals present in the body-wall gland of reared
female   O. novaezealandiae   from New Zealand.
  Identical crystals had been seen previously in
oothecae of other mantids.   Ward (1969) found that the
ootheca material was not chitin, probably contained protein,
and contained approximately 0.1% calcium.  
    The process of the formation of the ootheca in
  Orthodera novaezealandiae   has been illustrated or
described by Bandsma &amp; Brandt (1963), Sharell (1971), and
Castle (1988), and a detailed account of its production and of
oviposition is given by Ward (1969).   It is similar to that
described by Pagenstecher (1864), Perrier (1870), Brongniart
(1881), Fabre (1898), Giardina (1899), and Przibram (1907) for
  Mantis religiosa,   by C.E. Williams (1904) for
  Gongylus gongyloides,   by Kershaw (1910) for
  Hierodula saussurii,   by Rau &amp; Rau (1913) for
  Stagmomantis carolina  , by Adair (1914a, b) for
  Miomantis savignyi   and   Fischeria
baetica  , and by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916) for
  Sphodromantis guttata  .   The ootheca is formed
from a substance secreted by large abdominal glands which
hardens on exposure to the air.   It is vacuolated and
beaten into a froth by movements of the ovipositor blades.
  Regular cycles of abdominal movement occur as one group of
eggs is deposited on one side and then another on the other.
  The method of formation of the orifice rim of flaps and
the internal valve is obscure.   The wings play no part in
the process and the cerci monitor the surface being
produced.  
        Eggs     (Fig.41,42).   Each
egg, densely packed with yolk and with a soft, smooth,
glistening chorion, is 4.5 mm long by 1.25 mm wide when freed
from the ootheca and taking its natural form.   It is
subcylindrical to cigar-shaped, with the ventral surface
almost straight, the dorsal curved, and each end rounded, with
the anterior end slightly the narrower.The exochorion is
smooth, structureless, and slightly thicker at the anterior
pole&semi; the endochorion is densely and finely granular, the
granules appearing as rods in sectional view.   The granules
are refractive, vary in size and shape, and are uniformly
distributed over the whole egg.   Numerous small, clear
patches are distributed amongst the granules, especially
on the dorsal surface, where the granules are larger and
stronger.   In the mid-dorsal equatorial area a series of
unidirectional, strongly refractive, dart-shaped structures
occurs, each with longitudinal banding and pointed
posteriorly.   These are internal, and do not project above
the surface.   Other curved, rod-like structures shaped like
nail clippings occur posterior to these.  
    After the nymphs have hatched the chorion becomes
opaque and the darts are more conspicuous, appearing
dark-coloured when viewed from certain angles.   Their
distribution ceases within a conspicuous mid-dorsal
differentiation which is large (approx. 0.25 mm),
circular, and brown in colour.   It is a smooth, slightly
elevated dome with a strong, central, cup-shaped crater - the
micropyle - in which there are irregular, clear, refractive
patches.  
    Beier (1968) described and illustrated the egg of
  Hierodula crassa  , which is quite different from
that of   Orthodera novaezealandiae   in being more
complex, strongly tapered anteriorly, and dorsally concave,
with a chitinous cap covering its anterior third, and, in
particular, in having a transverse ring or furrow and a
projecting, tongue-like columella.   The micropyles are
scattered at the anterior pole.  
        Embryo    .   The fully
developed embryo is completely enclosed by an embryonic
cuticle within the chorion.   The abdominal part of this is
clothed with numerous tiny, posteriorly directed scales,
similar to those described by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916) in
various mantid embryos.   Anteriorly a strongly pigmented,
dark brown or black cephalic cap (Fig. 43) protects the
greatly enlarged and swollen vertex of the embryo.   This is
dome-shaped and, when flattened, subrhomboidal in outline.
  It is smooth and finely porose, and has a zone of strongly
incised cellular patterning along its lateral borders&semi; the
median border of patterning is sharply defined.
  Dorsoposteriorly it is emarginate and has a caudal
lobe or tail with a mid-dorsal ridge or fold and a line of
refractive spots which extends forwards on the cap.
  Ventroposteriorly it is triangular, and is formed into a
slender rod which, after hatching, comes to lie beneath the
folded membranous clypeus and partly beneath the strong
labrum.   The labrum is spatulate, truncate anteriorly, and
rounded posteriorly, with lateral and transverse apodemes
and studded with strong, small, refractive, posteriorly
directed scales.   Together with the cephalic cap and
ventral rod it may be part of the mechanism by which the
pronymph escapes from the egg and ootheca.   The embryo is
very similar to that of   Sphodromantis guttata  
(Thunb.) described and illustrated by Williams &amp; Buxton
(1916).  
        Hatching    .   The pronymph
splits the egg chorion longitudinally at the anterior pole
and squirms its way upwards, squeezing between the egg-chamber
closing flap and the chamber wall, through the plug of
foam-like material and out to the exterior of the ootheca.
  The embryonic cuticle is immediately moulted, and the
first-instar nymph emerges.   The process by which the
pronymph escapes from the egg has been described for
  Mantis religiosa   by Przibram (1907), for  
Sphodromantis guttata   by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916), and
for   Miomantis paykullii   St&aring;l
by Kumar (1973).   The part of the head between the eyes of
the emerging nymph becomes distended like a balloon and filled
with air.   By means of continual upward movement
(presumably contractions and pulsations distending the
balloon) the pronymph eventually breaks out of the egg and
squirms its way out of the ootheca.   The labrum, ventral
rod, and cephalic cap of the pronymph are no doubt important
in this process.  
      The latter part of the emergence of   O.
novaezealandiae   has been described and illustrated by
Suckling (1978) and by Castle (1988), and takes from seven to
ten or more minutes from the time the pronymph begins to
emerge from the ootheca.   The pronymph is attached to the
ootheca by a pair of long, fine hatching filaments so that the
cast-off embryonic cuticle with its cephalic shield remains
attached after the nymph has emerged.   The hatching
filaments, which are unique to mantids, are produced by
proliferations of cells of the embryonic cercus, and are
attached to the inner surface of the chorion at the posterior
pole of the egg.   They are composed of alpha-chitin (Rudall
1962), and develop from a helical filament of thread-forming
cells which transform into a syncytium and then secrete a
sheath of chitin around themselves (Kenchington 1969, 1984).
  These were first described by Pawlowa (1896, cited in
Williams &amp; Buxton 1916).  
        Immature stages    .   The
nymphs pass through six instars before becoming adult
(Suckling 1978)&semi; in mantids generally the number of
instars varies from six to nine (Beier 1968).   Development
takes from 3 to 6 months, and adults do not usually appear
until mid February at the earliest.   There is some evidence
that development may be synchronous, despite variation in
availability of food (Crosby 1984).   However, first-instar
nymphs occur from mid September through to January.   In
one instance, an ootheca laid on 25 April hatched on 26
October (183 days), the first stadium lasted 20 days, the
second 19 days, the third 10 days, the fourth 11 days, the
fifth 11 days, and the sixth 15 days, i.e., 86 days from
hatching to adult, and 269 days from oviposition to adulthood
(B. Tremain, pers. comm.).  
    First instars are 6.5 mm long and bright green in
colour except for a broad, longitudinal, mid-dorsal dark brown
band on the head and body which disappears after the first
moult.   The pronotum has the characteristic lateral
expansions but is more strongly tapered than in the later
stages.   Also, there is a thin, pale longitudinal line
passing mid-dorsally for the length of the body.   It is at
the crest of the pronotal ridge and causes the rest of the
body to appear ridged also.   Thereafter the nymphs are
uniformly bright green except for a reddish-brown border on
either side for the entire length of the body in some larger
nymphs, which may also have a mid-ventral longitudinal white
stripe on the abdomen, and the middle femora may be reddish
brown.  
    As with all small mantid nymphs, especially the first
instar, the head and eyes are proportionately much larger than
the rest of the body.   The lateral borders of the
prothorax of the first-instar nymph are already slightly
expanded, but not straight-sided as in the larger instars.
  There is a slight expansion above the attachment of the
raptorial legs.   The stance of the nymphs is
characteristic, in that the body is held more or less straight
rather than with the abdomen curled upwards (Sharell
1971).  
        Biological notes      
        Flight    .   Both males and
females of   O. novaezealandiae   fly, but the females
more reluctantly.   During late summer and early autumn
males are frequently attracted to lights at night, and can be
found on the window panes of lighted rooms.   They are also
attracted to mercury vapour lamps, and will settle on
light-trapping sheets or on walls in the vicinity of such a
lamp (C. Green, pers. comm.).  
        Behaviour    .     O.
novaezealandiae   is a relatively placid species, not
nearly as active and aggressive as   M. caffra  .
  Only rarely will it venture indoors, neither staying for
long nor laying oothecae there.   It further differs from
  M. caffra   in preferring to rest on the upper surface
of leaves and twigs.   Often several individuals can be
found similarly oriented, presenting the maximum upper body
surface area to the sun.     M. caffra   tends to hang
upside down from twigs and leaves when at rest.   This may
explain why its body is so strongly curved, especially in the
immature stages, gravity pulling the abdomen into a downward
(dorsad) curve.  
      O. novaezealandiae   may sometimes be observed
with a captured housefly held in the raptorial forelegs.
  Occasionally two mantids will capture the same fly and
proceed to devour it (Homewood 1978).   An instance of
deliberate piracy was observed by T.K. Crosby (pers. comm.).
  A female devouring a honeybee was stealthily approached
from the left rear by another female, which gradually
positioned itself to the front before grabbing the prey.
  In the ensuing fracas the mantids frequently struck at
each other with their forelegs.   The original owner failed
to repossess its half-eaten prey, and eventually moved away.
  During this latter phase, which lasted some 10 minutes,
the robbed mantid faced the aggressor with its forelegs folded
but turned outwards to display the femoral colour patches.
  Its wings were slightly spread also.   The aggressor
held its prize with the left foreleg, which was extended at
'arm 's length' to the side&semi; the right foreleg was turned
outwards to display the femoral colour patch.   When the bee
was first captured the pirate mantid was at least 1.5 m
distant and deliberately moved to challenge the captor for its
prey.  
        Colour    .   The coloration of
  O. novaezealandiae   is relatively constant.
  Apart from very rare instances of luteinism - bright
yellow individuals - reported for this species (see p. 44), it
is invariably a bright green, with little or no variation
apart from amounts of a reddish-brown pigment which sometimes
occur on the vertex, the lateral rims of the pronotum, the
leading edge of the forewings, and on the middle and hind
legs.  
        Interspecific mating    .   There
have been several observations of males of this species
mating with females of   M. caffra  .   In one
instance, at Parnell, Auckland, 5 April 1989, the pair were
closely examined to ensure that copulation was actually taking
place (D.T. Gardiner, D. Cowley, pers. comm.).   Whether or
not fertile eggs or parthenogenetic development resulted is
unknown, but hybrids have never been found (Ramsay, in
prep.).  
        Sex ratio    .   Even though few
males of   O. novaezealandiae   are lost by sexual
cannibalism, few of them survive through to late autumn and
winter.   Probably their lifespan is shorter than that of
females.   In contrast, all males of   M. caffra  
disappear within a short period, probably as a result of
sexual cannibalism.      
  

      HISTORY OF COLONIZATION  
    There were at least 24 successful liberations of
fallow in New Zealand between 1860 and 1910 (Challies, 1985a).
  Some initially successful populations later died out, or
merged.   In the 1980s, 13 discrete wild populations remain
(Table 86)&semi; the histories of the nine largest surviving herds
are as follows.  
    (1)   South Kaipara herd  .   The owner of the
South Kaipara Head Station in 1900, Alfred Buckland, was a
foundation member of the Auckland Acclimatisation Society, and
introduced fallow for sport and meat&semi; in the early years
venison was sold to station employees (Lane, 1982).   In the
1920s hunting by invitation was instituted under licence, and
there was also some culling because of damage to crops.
  All protection was removed in 1930.   After 1939, the
South Kaipara Head estate was subdivided into small farms.
  About 1955, the owner of the largest block, Waioneke (880
ha), started a conservation programme for fallow.   The herd
flourished, and by 1969 up to 1700 deer were present on
private farms.   The herd produced the top New Zealand
fallow deer trophies for five of the six years to 1971 (Lane,
1982).   Since the development of commercial hunting and of
deer farming during the 1970s, the numbers of wild fallow have
fallen (Spiro, 1979).   Most of those left are found in
Woodhill State Forest.  
    (2)   Matamata herd  .   This herd was
established from English stock in 1877.   Thomson (1922)
stated that the   "herd has increased very largely, and
is noted for the fine heads of the stags  "     and
reckoned that over 1000 deer had been harvested.   Since
then, gradual habitat loss through land clearance has greatly
reduced the herd&semi; the small residual population lives mainly
on private land.  
    (3)   Te Puke herd  .   Established by the
transfer of stock from Motutapu I. in 1884 and augmented by
additions from Otago in 1908, this population was also
initially successful, but has decreased because of habitat
loss and intensified hunting pressure.   Live trapping for
farm stock has further reduced numbers in recent years, and
only small numbers remain.   Unlike the predominantly black
phase fallow populations elsewhere in New Zealand, about half
the Te Puke herd are of the "Spanish" strain (Egan, 1969).  
    (4)   Wanganui herd  .   This herd developed
from two liberations, one well up the Wanganui River in 1877
(Thomson, 1922&semi; Donne 1924), and the other at Featherstone
Stream, Kaiwhaiki, later in the 1880s (Walton, 1986).   The
growth of the herd was apparently slow to start with, although
the first fallow shooting licences were issued before 1889.
  Further attempts to add to the herd quality were not
successful until 1935, when a "Spanish" strain doe from the Te
Puke herd was introduced (Walton, 1986).   By the 1920s, the
herd was   "too  "     numerous and several
hundred animals were removed (Donne, 1924).   All protection
was lifted in 1930.   However, the herd continued to spread,
and at its peak occupied an area of 60 x 40 km.   An
isolated group of fallow to the north suggests that the spread
of this herd was probably assisted by man (W. J. Simmons,
unpubl.).   From the 1960s onward numbers declined to very
low levels on public land and on many farms.   On other
farms, however, the deer are protected, and some high density
pockets remain (P. Butler, unpubl.).  
    (5)   Mount Arthur herd  .   This herd was
established by translocation of an unknown number of deer,
probably from Otago.   There were two liberations, one at
Barrons flat near Takaka, and the other at Flora Saddle.
  It reached peak densities in the 1940s, but declined soon
after (Clarke, 1976b).  
    (6)   Aniseed Valley herd  .   This herd is
derived from an original liberation of English stock in 1864,
plus additional animals transferred from the Wakatipu herd in
1906.   It may have reached peak densities as early as the
1920s, after which intensified hunting kept numbers in check,
although perhaps also stimulating dispersal (Clarke, 1976b).
  The range of the herd has not changed in recent years.  
    (7)   Paparoa herd  .   Red deer were absent
from the Paparoa Range in the late 1880s, when fallow were
translocated there from Motutapu I.&semi; so this herd increased
quickly and expanded north.   Peak numbers were reached
between 1925 and 1935, and persisted till the 1950s (Clarke,
1976b).   By the 1980s, fallow remained only in pockets
along the eastern flank of the Paparoa Range, and densities
were low and static (Morse, 1981).  
  table: Table 86: History, location and status of the 13
herds of wild fallow deer in New Zealand.  
    (8)   Wakatipu herd  .   The origins of this
herd are not certain, but the foundation stock was probably
supplied by the Otago Acclimatisation Society from the Blue
Mountains.   By the 1930s, a forest ranger, D. Dunn,
reported extensive damage to the indigenous forest, and that
  "not a vestige of feed remained"   (Rose, 1977).
  Subsequent culling (including poisoning trials&semi; Daniel,
1966b) may have reduced the herd slightly, but the greatest
reduction was achieved after the commercialization of
hunting.  
    (9)   Blue Mountains herd  .   The original
animals were imported from Tasmania in 1869, with the
intention of establishing an English-style deer park at
Tapanui.   The deer became very numerous, and by 1899 had
dispersed into the adjacent Blue Mountains.   By 1903, over
2000 fallow bucks had been shot by licensed stalkers,
including many which yielded large trophies (Donne, 1924).
  The herd increased further, causing damage to farm crops
and eating out the understorey of the indigenous forest.
  In 1923 all protection was removed from the herd, and in
1926, 3890 deer tails were collected by NZFS from the Blue
Mountains area (Baker, 1972).   Despite continued heavy
hunting pressure and poisoning trials, the population remained
high until the 1950s and was generally in poor condition
(Wodzicki, 1950&semi; Shearing, 1965&semi; Daniel, 1967&semi; Baker, 1973).
  After 1960 hunting pressure increased, and the reported
kill from the state forests making up the core of the range
declined from 2000 per year in the early 1960s, to around 400
in 1984 (Nugent, 1985).  
    There were also some unsuccessful liberations.
  Fallow disappeared after release at Cairn Bush (Otago) in
1899 (Wodzicki, 1950)&semi; in the Morven Hills (Otago) in 1867
(Baker, 1972)&semi; and at Hawarden (Canterbury) in 1882 (Lamb,
1964).   Two fallow released on Kapiti I. in 1900 either
died out or were shot when the island was made a sanctuary
(Wodzicki, 1950).   Fallow deer liberated near Whangamoa
(Nelson) were exterminated about 1912 because they damaged
crops (Clarke, 1976b).   A herd established on Kawau I. by
Sir George Grey in 1862-64 became extinct about 1966 (K.
Purdon, unpubl.).   A small herd near Coromandel, derived
from releases around 1900 near Thames, is reported to have
died out after 1963 (K. Purdon, unpubl.), but there are
persistent rumours that wild fallow still survive there (G. W.
Asher, unpubl. and Map 37).   Christie and Andrews (1966)
refer to a northern Auckland population, and Wodzicki (1950)
states that fallow were present in Herbert State Forest, north
of Dunedin, but there are no recent reports of fallow in these
areas.  
    The total number of fallow imported before 1910 was
probably only 50-60 animals, so many of the liberations
involved translocations of stock from elsewhere in New
Zealand.   All the documented importations came from
England, Wales or Tasmania, and the Tasmanian fallow herds
were themselves probably all derived from English stock
(Bentley, 1967&semi; Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1980).   Since the advent
of deer farming in the 1970s, farmers interested in livestock
improvement have begun a second wave of importations,
including stock from outside Britain (p. 490&semi; Otway, 1986&semi;
Massey, 1987).  
      DISTRIBUTION    
    WORLD.   Fallow are indigenous to countries
bordering the Mediterranean
  map: Map 43 Distribution of fallow deer in New Zealand  
(Lister, 1984).   They have been introduced to all
continents (38 countries) and are now among the most
widespread of ungulates.   The most complete summaries of
their present world distribution are provided by Chapman and
Chapman (1980) and Lever (1985).  
    NEW ZEALAND (Map 43, Table 86).   Fallow are the
second most widespread deer species in the wild in New
Zealand.   The 13 wild populations are scattered from north
of Auckland to Southland (latitudes 36&deg; to
46&deg;S).   The herd on Rangitoto-Motutapu Is.
(the two islands are joined at low tide) is near extinction,
and the South Manukau, Kaikoura I. and South Canterbury
(Burkes Pass-Two Thumb region) herds are small, and, although
wild, almost totally confined to private farmland.   The
remaining nine herds are truly wild and well established on
both public and private lands as follows.  
    (1)   South Kaipara  : Wild fallow are virtually
restricted to Woodhill State Forest (14 700 ha), although
there are thousands of fallow on nearby farms (Spiro,
1979).  
    (2)   Matamata  : Fallow are present in the
Maungakawa and Matamata ranges (Te Miro and Te Tapui Scenic
Reserves) and on private land around Whitehall (S. Kelton,
unpubl.).  
    (3)   Te Puke  : Oripi and Otanewainuku State
Forests, plus Otawa and other Scenic Reserves, in patches of
Crown land and on private farmland (M. C. Llewellyn,
unpubl.).  
    (4)   Wanganui  : From the Waitotara River to
the Whangaehu River, and northwards on both sides of the
Wanganui River beyond Jerusalem, including Lismore State
Forest&semi; also south-east of the Waitotara Forest in Taranaki,
in Waitotara, Tarere, and Kapara State Forests, and Patokino
Reserve (S. D. Kelton &amp; W. J. Simmons, unpubl&semi; J. Barkla,
unpubl.).  
    (5)   Mount Arthur  : Most of the Mount Arthur
Tablelands region, the Grecian and Flora catchments, and the
lower Cobb valley (Hayward, 1983).  
    (6)   Aniseed Valley  : Bryant Range, Pelorus
River valley, Mount Richmond and extending into Marlborough
(Clarke, 1976b).  
    (7)   Paparoa Range  : From Blackball to the
Inangahua Landing, mainly on the eastern flank of the Paparoa
Range (Morse, 1981).  
    (8)   Wakatipu  : Greenstone and Caples valleys,
and Mount Creighton&semi; plus a few in the Moonlight and adjacent
catchments in the Shotover region, on the eastern foothills of
the Humboldt Mountains, and occasionally in the Earnslaw, Rees
and Dart catchments (Cuddihy &amp; Ross, 1979).  
    (9)   Blue Mountains  : Beaumont, Rankleburn and
Tapanui State Forests, and on private farmland around the
south-east and northern margins of these.   Also in pockets
of bush on the eastern bank of the Clutha River, and in
Glendhu State Forest, 15 km to the north-east (N. Hills,
unpubl.).  
    In addition, fallow may legally be farmed in most
rural areas of the North and South Islands, and many farms are
well outside the present range of wild fallow.   It is
inevitable that escapes from farms or illegal liberations will
extend the distribution of wild fallow deer&semi; such incidents
have already been reported from near Oxford (10 deer) and on
Banks Peninsula (2 deer) in Canterbury.  
      HABITAT    
    Fallow occupy a wide range of habitats, ranging from
improved pasture on farms to dense rain forest on the west
coast of the South Island (Table 86).   Most wild fallow
live in indigenous forest or shrubland, especially around the
scrubby margins of farms whose owners provide some protection
from hunting.   They also occupy commercial plantations
(Lismore, Woodhill, Blue Mountains).   Fallow in the South
Island formerly made some use of the subalpine tussock zone in
the Mount Arthur, Blue Mountains, Paparoa and Wakatipu areas,
but the species always appeared to be more at home in the low
altitude forests, and the low density populations of the 1980s
seldom venture above timberline (e.g., Buckingham,
1985).    
      FOOD    
    Fallow eat a wide range of plant species, including
most, if not all, of those eaten by domestic stock.   In the
wild in New Zealand they prefer the same indigenous plants as
other deer (see red deer, p. 444, and Wodzicki, 1950), their
diet depending on which of these is locally available.
  They have a high ratio of rumen volume to body weight
compared with other cervids (Hoffman, 1985).   Hoffman
suggests that this reflects a greater adaptation to
non-selective grazing of short sward grasses and herbs than in
other cervids, which tend to concentrate more on selective
browsing of trees and shrubs.   Around farm margins and on
deer farms, fallow readily graze introduced grass and herb
species, but they can also thrive in indigenous forests even
where grasses are scarce.  
    A study of fallow deer diet in the Blue Mountains
between 1982 and 1984 (G. Nugent, unpubl.) showed marked
differences in diet between habitat types.   In commercial
pine forest, where deer densities were low and introduced
plant species common, the five most important summer foods (in
decreasing order of importance) were grasses, herbs, fungi
(mainly mushrooms), broadleaf (  Griselinia
littoralis  ) and small-leaved   Coprosma   species.
  In winter, broadleaf became more important and fungi less
important, but grass was still by far the most common food.
  Fallow also ate small quantities of introduced weeds such
as gorse (  Ulex europaeus  ), broom (  Cytisus
scoparius  ), blackberry (  Rubus fruticosa  ) and
Himalayan honeysuckle (  Leycesteria formosa  ).
  Woody browse appeared to be an important dietary
requirement&semi; even on lush pasture fallow still occasionally
ate gorse and broom.   None of the planted conifers was
touched.  
    In silver beech forests (  Nothofagus
menziesii  ), the important summer foods were fungi,
broadleaf, lichen (mainly   Usnea   spp.),
  Coprosma   spp. and grasses&semi; the main winter foods
were broadleaf,   Coprosma   spp.,   Carpodetus
serratus   and   Pseudopanax   spp.   The heavy
reliance on fungi and lichen reflected the scarcity of
palatable foliage within the reach of deer, as most developing
seedlings of preferred species were eliminated at an early
age.   Most of the leaves eaten had fallen from the canopy,
especially in winter when they were knocked down by snow and
wind.  
      SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND BEHAVIOUR    
    Undisturbed fallow tend to be gregarious, with a
highly developed social tolerance (Massey, 1985).   The
Wakatipu herd, in particular, was well known for the large
groups (100+), containing all age and sex classes, that grazed
the valley flats in the 1950s.   However, heavy hunting
during the 1960s and 1970s reduced the herd so much that
groups of more than three or four became rare by the 1980s (R.
Martin, unpubl.).  
    Home range size depends to some extent on the
distribution of resources, but is often &lt;100
ha (Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1975).   Ranges are not exclusive&semi;
those of males tend to be larger than those of females, and
divided into separate summer and rutting ranges.  
    Fallow deer have a variety of vocalizations.
  During the rut, males groan repeatedly and loudly to
advertise their location.   When startled, females, in
particular, often bark loudly several times, at about
10-20-second intervals.   Does with young fawns may produce
a medium high-pitched bleat, and deer of any age may accompany
submission postures with a higher-pitched mewing sound.
  Fawns make a different high-pitched peeping sound when
distressed, or to contact their dams.   Younger deer, in
particular, may scream when wounded or captured.  
    Fallow also communicate with each other visually.
  When mildly disturbed, one member of a group may adopt an
"alert" posture, with the neck extended vertically and the
body held rigid, and the rest of the group will often follow
suit even if unaware of the danger.   They may also stamp
their hooves, and walk stiff-legged towards the potential
danger, usually holding the tail upright.   Fallow may flee
a mild disturbance with a slightly exaggerated rhythmic trot,
or a bouncing gait in which all four feet leave the ground
simultaneously, but they usually flee a sudden disturbance at
the gallop, often with a low "woof" of alarm.  
    The rut begins in April.   Males lose interest in
food and their necks swell.   They establish rutting
territories by making several scrapes in the ground with their
forefeet, and urinating in them.   Surrounding bushes are
thrashed and scent-marked with secretions from the preorbital
glands.   Rutting males on farms may groan for several
weeks, but those in hunted populations often restrict groaning
to one or two days at the peak of the rut (R. Webb, D.
Harrison, unpubl.).   In the Blue Mountains, Baker (1973)
heard groaning periodically between 31 March and 17 May,
mostly between 22 April and 6 May.  
    Antlers are cast in October or November, and the
development of new ones is usually complete by February
(Riney, 1954).  
    It is generally accepted that females are attracted to
the rutting stand by the presence of the male.   They are
not usually herded up into a harem as in other deer (Chapman &amp;
Chapman, 1975), except on farms (Anon., 1984c).   In high
density undisturbed populations, males do not usually breed
until at least four years of age, because subordinate bucks
are excluded from mating by the older bucks.   However, most
of the heavily hunted wild populations in New Zealand now
contain few such fully mature bucks (Baker, 1973), so even
yearling males may get the chance to breed.   Mating
behaviour is described in detail by Asher and Kilgour
(1985).  
      REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT    
    Fallow reproduction in New Zealand is described by
Asher (1985b) and Baker (1973).   Does usually breed for the
first time at 16 months of age, although it is possible for
fawns to conceive in their first year of life (Ueckerman &amp;
Hansen, 1968).   Fallow are polyoestrous.   Does may have
up to six oestrous cycles during the breeding season, with a
mean cycle length of 22.4 +/- 1.3 (SD) days.   The first
oestrus of the season is synchronized within a 2-week period
in late April, although young does breeding for the first time
usually come into oestrus a week later than older does.
  Most breeding does conceive during the first cycle.
  The average gestation period of 88 farm does was 234.2 +/-
2.7 (SD) days (Asher, 1985b), and the main peak of births was
in mid December.   There was a second, much smaller peak in
births about 21-22 days later, and some births (2-3%) as late
as March.   Twinning is rare.  
    Sterba and Klusak (1984) and Chapman and Chapman
(1975) describe the development of fallow.   Newborn fawns
tend to remain hidden for several weeks, except when the doe
returns to feed them.   They begin to take solid food almost
immediately, although rumination does not begin until the
second or third week after birth.   Lactation may continue
for up to 9 months, but many fawns are weaned at 4-5
months.  
    The full adult dentition is usually in place by 2.5
years of age (Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1975).   Males begin to
develop antlers at 7-9 months of age and reach sexual maturity
in their second year (Baker, 1973).   Females appear to
reach full body size by 6 years of age, whereas males may not
be fully grown until their ninth year.  
      POPULATION DYNAMICS    
    There are no accurate estimates of the total number of
wild fallow in New Zealand, but it is unlikely there were many
more than 5000 in 1985 (some details on individual herds, past
and present, are given in Table 86).   By contrast, there
were probably about 30 000 fallow deer on farms at that time
(G. W Asher, unpubl.).   Pemberton and Smith (1985) cite a
1984 world population estimate of 164 000.  
    Baker (1973) reports a pregnancy rate of 91.4% for 70
wild does more than 1 year old.   The pregnancy rate of does
in their second year is generally lower than that of older
does.   The sex ratio at birth is probably close to 1:1
(Baker, 1973&semi; Sterba &amp; Klusak, 1984&semi; Asher &amp; Adams, 1985).  
    Although fallow may live for up to 32 years (Ueckerman
&amp; Hansen, 1968), the oldest male among 351 deer shot in the
Blue Mountains in 1971 was 8 years old and the oldest female
12 (Baker, 1973).   In the 1980s mortality not due to
hunting appeared to be rare in the Blue Mountains, as no
natural mortality was observed among an average of 30 young
deer during a 2-year radio-tracking study (G. Nugent,
unpubl.).   In unprotected herds in New Zealand most deer
are shot within the first two years of life, males sooner, on
average, than females (Baker, 1973&semi; Nugent, 1985).   Such
mortality patterns produce a predominantly female adult
population with a high annual productivity.   Nugent (1985)
estimated that 40 fawns were born for every 100 deer present
in the Blue Mountains before the 1984 fawning season.  
    Fallow tend to remain close to where they were born,
which explains why they were slow to disperse from liberation
points&semi; the Wanganui herd spread at 0.8 km/year (Caughley,
1963), the South Kaipara herd at 0.6 km/year (from Lane, 1982)
and the Paparoa herd at 0.8 km/year (Clarke, 1976b).   Most
dispersal is by young males nearing the end of their first
year, and typically, these move less than 3 km from their
natal range (G. Nugent, unpubl. telemetry data, Blue
Mountains).   By contrast, shifts of up to 32 km have been
recorded in red deer in the Cupola basin (Gibb &amp; Flux,
1973).  
    Fallow may have a competitive advantage over red deer,
as Challies (1985a) noted that red deer have tended not to
establish in areas, such as the Blue Mountains and Wakatipu,
where fallow had already reached high density.   Kean (1959)
considers that fallow can displace red deer except at high
altitudes.   Batcheler (1960) suggested that fallow in
Scotland were better adapted to a mature forest environment
than red deer.  
      PREDATORS, PARASITES AND DISEASES    
    In New Zealand the only predators of fallow are man
and dogs.   Although dogs are seldom used specifically to
catch deer, the dogs used to hunt pigs occasionally catch
them, especially fawns up to three months old (S. Cook,
unpubl.).
On farms fallow are prone to facial eczema, pneumonia,
ryegrass staggers and possibly leptospirosis, but yersiniosis
and malignant catarrhal fever are unheard of (Massey, 1985).
  Free-ranging fallow are generally regarded as disease
resistant and healthy (Spiro, 1979).   However, Christie and
Andrews (1966), Daniel (1967), Andrews (1973) and others
report the incidence of a number of parasites and diseases in
fallow in New Zealand, as follows.   Protozoa:
  Eimeria   sp. (Collins, 1981b).   Trematoda:
Paramphistomatidae (P. C. Mason, unpubl.).   Cestoda:
  Taenia hydatigena   (Sweatman &amp; Williams, 1962) and
  Moniezia   sp. (P. C. Mason &amp; N. Gladden, unpubl.).
  Nematoda:   Dictyocaulus viviparus   in the lungs
(Wilson &amp; Collier, 1981),   Apteragia odocoilei,
Spiculopteragia asymmetria   and   Trichostrongylus
axei   in the abomasum (Andrews, 1973&semi; P. C. Mason,
unpubl.),   Capilleria   sp. in the small intestine (P.
C. Mason, unpubl.),   Oesophagostomum venulosum   and
  Trichuris   sp. in the large intestine (Andrews, 1973&semi;
P. C. Mason &amp; N. Gladden, unpubl.).   Acari:
  Haemophysalis longicornis   (cattle tick) on the skin
(P. R. Wilson, unpubl.).  
      ADAPTATION TO NEW ZEALAND CONDITIONS    
    Despite an apparently limited genetic base, fallow
deer have adapted well to New Zealand conditions.   When
provided with adequate cover or protection, they have occupied
a wide range of habitats and reached high densities in many
areas.   Although they are normally animals of the forest
margin, fallow in the Blue Mountains and elsewhere have
thrived in forested areas with few clearings.   Their patchy
distribution (relative to red deer) appears to be a
consequence of their site tenacity and slow dispersal rate.
  As with red deer, the period of highest metabolic demand
(fawning and lactation) starts in December, after the main
spring flush of plant growth.   Because of this, fallow are,
at this stage, less suited to farming than sheep or cattle,
particularly in areas prone to summer drought.   However,
crossbreeding experiments with Persian fallow now in progress
(Otway, 1986) may produce an earlier-calving strain more
likely to do well on New Zealand farms in future.  
    At the low densities prevailing in the 1980s, wild
fallow in New Zealand appear to be about the same size as both
farmed fallow in New Zealand and English park fallow, since
the lower jaw lengths of adults are much the same regardless
of origin (Table 85).   However, overseas the most frequent
coat colour phase is red-brown with conspicuous spots, whereas
in New Zealand (except in the Te Puke herd) it is the black
phase with faint spots or none.  
      SIGNIFICANCE TO THE NEW ZEALAND ENVIRONMENT    
    DAMAGE AND CONTROL.   Fallow deer have caused severe
modification to indigenous vegetation in some areas (Wodzicki,
1950&semi; Christie &amp; Andrews, 1966&semi; Rose, 1977&semi; Bathgate, 1977&semi;
Hayward, 1983), although most populations live in areas
already massively modified by man.   Major control campaigns
to alleviate damage were conducted in the Blue Mountains and
Wakatipu areas (Wodzicki, 1950&semi; Daniel, 1966b&semi; Baker, 1972),
and there has been smaller-scale control work in other areas
(Donne, 1924&semi; Harris, 1967&semi; Lane, 1982).   The general
reductions in density since the 1960s have removed the need
for active control.  
      CURRENT MANAGEMENT.   The flighty nature and
small size of fallow deer, and the low demand for their antler
velvet, have made them less commercially desirable than red
deer (Yerex, 1982).   One consequence of this is that fallow
have been substantially involved in recent developments
relating to recreational hunting.  
    Much of the range of the Blue Mountains herd was
gazetted as the first Recreational Hunting Area (RHA) in 1980
(under the 1977 Wild Animals Control Act), and is now managed
with the needs of sport hunters in mind (Nugent &amp; Mawhinney,
1987).   Since then, recreational hunting has further
decreased the deer population within the RHA, and in late 1986
restrictions on hunting were imposed (NZFS, 1986).   RHAs
have also been established in the Wakatipu (1981) and Mount
Arthur (1981) areas, and similar hunting restrictions imposed
(Hayward &amp; Hosking, 1986).  
    In the North Island, the fallow population in Woodhill
has been managed for recreational hunting (Lane, 1982&semi; Deuss,
1983b&semi; Broome, 1985), although Woodhill is not gazetted as an
RHA.   In Wanganui, positive management intended to build up
the herd in Lismore State Forest began in April 1985 with the
liberation of 21 fallow does from Blue Mountains and South
Kaipara stock (Simmons, 1985&semi; Benes, 1986).   This was the
first officially sanctioned release of farm deer into the wild
since deer were declared noxious animals in the 1930s, and
reflects the recent fundamental change in official attitudes
to wild animal management in New Zealand.  
    The remaining herds of fallow on public land are also
at low density, and few animals are harvested annually (Table
86).   Legal access to these herds is usually difficult to
obtain.  
    Farming of fallow began slowly, because of the limited
availability of stock, and because fallow were more difficult
to handle using conventional livestock techniques (Fitzi &amp;
Monk, 1977&semi; Spiro, 1979&semi; Massey, 1985, 1986).   However
Waioneke Park, one of the first large deer farms, demonstrated
that the species could be successfully farmed (Spiro, 1979),
and substantial numbers of wild fallow have been caught using
pen traps, tranquillizer darts, drive nets, or helicopters
(Spiro, 1979&semi; Yerex, 1982).   As with other deer, fallow
have a lower fat content and higher muscle to bone ratio than
sheep and cattle (Gregson &amp; Purchas, 1985).   Many farmers
now believe that fallow provide a better quality venison than
red deer, and fallow are becoming increasingly common on farms
(Massey, 1986&semi; Walton, 1986).      
  

        CHAPTER 7    
      PASTURE ASSESSMENT FOR LIVESTOCK
MANAGERS    
  R. J. Lucas and K. F. Thompson
  table (of chapter contents)  
          7.1
Introduction        
    All pastoral farmers assess pastures when managing
livestock.   Often these assessments are expressed
qualitatively as  'short of feed' or 'having a surplus' and are
based on experience from previous seasons.   Recently,
however, visual assessment and non-destructive instruments
such as capacitance meters, plate meters, and sward sticks
have been developed for rapid, quantitative measurement of
pasture mass.   In addition, livestock managers need to
estimate the proportion of plant species as well as the green
leaf and dead material composition of swards, as these
components have a major influence on pasture feeding value and
hence animal productivity.   Prediction of pasture
production is also an important part of effective feed
planning.  
    This chapter describes briefly feed planning, gives
suggestions for rapid pasture assessment by farmers, and
discusses pasture assessment methods of direct relevance to
livestock managers in commercial farming, consultancy, or
research.  
          7.2 Planning pasture
feeding        
    Efficient pastoral farming depends firstly on
establishing the annual stocking rate appropriate for the
expected pasture production, and secondly on managing seasonal
feeding levels to maximize livestock productivity.
  Livestock production per ha (stocking rate x production
per head) is used to compare productivity of livestock systems
and can also be used as an indication of pasture production.
  For example, on a dairy farm producing 525 kg/ha of
milkfat, the dry matter (DM) intake will be about 12 500 kg/ha
annually (see also Section 7.3.4).   Dairy farmers are
fortunate as they have a daily measurement of milk production,
and this gives a good indication of the animal response to
grazing management and animal husbandry.   Sheep and beef
farmers use lambing and calving percentages, fleece weights,
and carcass weights.   These measures are derived at the end
of the production cycle and the effect of earlier pasture
management on livestock productivity several months later is
often difficult to determine.   For more rapid feedback on
performances, live-weight targets are used on sheep and cattle
farms to set seasonal and short-term pasture feeding
objectives.   Accurate livestock scales and their regular
use are important for efficiently managed pastoral
enterprises.  
    The need for pasture planning depends on the intensity
of the farming system and the level of production.   Farmers
who aim for high productivity per ha regularly use some method
of feed planning.   Generally, when pasture production is
lower than expected, particularly in droughts, feed planning
is adopted more widely.   Assessments of the quantity of
pasture on a farm and prediction of pasture production in the
coming season are essential for planning of pasture feeding.
  Pasture cover (kg/ha DM) is the current pasture resource
on a farm and is estimated from the total pasture mass divided
by the grazed area.   In addition, data on rate of pasture
production are used to predict future pasture supply.
  Standard data (Table 7.1) and previous experience are
modified by a knowledge of current soil moisture status,
expected rainfall, and temperature over the feed-planning
period.   The use and methods of assessing pasture cover and
rate of production are described in more detail in Sections
7.3 and 7.4.   How this information is used will depend on
the type of decision required.  
    The outline of feed planning on pasture which follows
is based on a more detailed description presented by Milligan
  et al.   (1987).   It is important to define
objectives and to distinguish between feed profiling, feed
budgets, and grazing plans.  
      Feed profiling - for setting long-term policy
such as stocking rate, timing of lambing or calving, or
determining general stock buying and selling policy.  
    Feed budgets - for seasonal or medium-term planning to
decide the best use of a feed surplus or the least costly way
of overcoming a feed deficit.  
    Grazing plans - short-term planning to achieve desired
intakes.   Decisions relate to rotation length, how long
stock should stay in a paddock, or when to use conserved
feed.    
  graphs (Figure 7.1)    caption  
  table 7.1  
        7.2.1 Feed profiling      
    Feed profiling is used to determine the type of
livestock system that suits an expected pattern of pasture
production.   Feed profiles indicate the appropriate
stocking rate and timing of events that lead to changes in
livestock feed demand.   These events are the timing of
calving, lambing, fawning, and kidding, and the timing of sale
of surplus stock, or purchase of breeding replacements or
stock for finishing.   Feed profiling is usually done on an
annual basis and compares feed demand for the chosen stocking
rate and level of animal production with monthly pattern of
pasture production for average weather conditions.  
    Daily average feed demands (kg/ha DM) for each month
are obtained by adding the demand for each class of stock.
  These are calculated by multiplying the daily average
intake (kg/head DM) by stocking rate (animals/ha) for the
month.   Feed demand is usually graphed together with feed
supply - the daily rate of pasture production (kg/ha DM)
(Figure 7.1a).   To ensure that the system will work and the
desired intakes will be achieved, the pattern of pasture cover
(Section 7.3.1) is calculated (Figure 7.1b).   Hay or
silage-making and supplementary feeding can be planned to keep
pasture cover within the desirable limits of 1000-2500 kg/ha
DM.  
        7.2.2 Feed budgeting      
    Feed budgets should be undertaken whenever a feed
surplus or shortage appears to be developing.   The need to
budget will be indicated by pasture cover deviating from the
pattern associated with the feed profile for the system.
  The feed budget should result in a financial decision on
the most profitable way to use a surplus or the least costly
way of overcoming a deficit.  
    Pasture feed supply in a feed budget is calculated
from three items of information.   The starting point is the
pasture cover at the beginning of the budget period.
  Pasture produced during the budget period is added to this
and the desired pasture cover at the end is subtracted (Table
7.2).   Animal demand is calculated by adding the feed
required per ha for each class of animal (numbers in mob
&divide; farm area x daily per head intake x
days).   Animal demand is subtracted from pasture supply, to
give a measure of deficit or balance or surplus.   A deficit
can be met by either feeding supplements or accepting lower
feed intakes and stock performance.   When there is a
surplus the alternatives include conservation (hay, or
silage), purchasing more stock, or accepting higher intakes
and animal productivity.   Sometimes pasture growth rate may
need to be changed by applying, for example, irrigation,
nitrogen fertilizer, insecticides, or combinations
thereof.  
        7.2.3 Grazing plans      
    These are usually prepared where rotational grazing is
intensive and a farmer wishes to use a pasture feed bank to
achieve a particular level of animal productivity.   There
are two approaches, allowance and residual pasture mass, and
both methods calculate the grazing duration for a mob of
animals on a series of paddocks.   The feed planner must
know the pasture mass on each paddock at the time it is to be
grazed.   The allowance approach uses the relationship of
daily pasture allowance (kg/head DM) to animal productivity,
  table 7.2  
and the farmer selects the allowance associated with the
target animal productivity.   The calculation is:
  formula  
  The residual pasture mass approach uses relationships
between animal productivity and both post-grazing pasture mass
and intake.   The calculation is:
  formula    
      Livestock Feeding on Pasture   (Nicol, 1987)
presents relationships between animal productivity and pasture
allowance or residual pasture mass for most classes of stock
and discusses in detail the use of these relationships.
  Care is required in using these relationships, as several
factors affect grazing intake and animal productivity (see
Chapter 8).   Pasture mass, clover proportion, and dead
material are the important sward factors influencing pasture
intake and animal performance.  
  table 7.3  
    Grazing plans can also be formulated with
set-stocking.   Stocking rate is adjusted to achieve the
pasture mass (or pasture height) necessary for the desired
intake.   The opportunity to manipulate grazing conditions
to achieve short-term changes in intake is far less with
set-stocking than with rotational grazing.   Because the
allowance approach does not work, all decisions need to be
based on residual pasture mass or pasture height (Table 7.3).
  A knowledge of the effect of pasture height or mass on
intake and animal performance permits the farmer to allocate
different classes of stock to paddocks where the pasture is
appropriate to the desired intake.  
          7.3 Pasture assessment by
livestock managers        
    This section introduces methods farmers may use to
assess pasture mass, pasture cover, and rate of pasture
production.  
        7.3.1 Pasture mass and pasture
cover      
    Pasture cover is calculated by assessing the pasture
mass (kg/ha DM) on each paddock and multiplying by paddock
area and then adding these for all paddocks and dividing the
sum by total area.   This gives an average cover per ha.
  Some farmers prefer total cover (kg DM) rather than an
average&semi; that is, they do not divide by total area of the
farm.   This can be satisfactory but it involves very large
numbers, and is of little use for comparison with other farms
or recommended levels.   One short cut for assessing pasture
cover is to mean the pasture masses on the longest and
shortest paddocks, which gives an estimate of the cover over
the farm.   Paddock areas need to be similar for this to
work.  
    An essential part of pasture cover calculations is the
estimation of pasture mass.   Visual assessments are used
widely, although pasture height, pasture probes (capacitance
meters), and plate meters are also being used (see Section
7.4).   Variations on visual pasture assessments are many,
and the techniques developed in the New Zealand dairy industry
in the 1960s of assessing pasture cover as 'cow grazing days'
were the forerunners to current pasture feed planning.
  Some farmers score paddocks and assign a number (1-10)
according to their visual assessment of pasture mass.
  Others assess mass in kg/ha DM.   The unit by which
pastures are scored is immaterial, provided the farmer is
reliable and consistent in his estimates and ends up with data
that lead to useful and profitable decisions.   The
important point is that pastures should be inspected regularly
so that changes in the total pasture resource are observed and
quantified.  
    Pasture assessment is easiest where grazing is
rotational and variation among paddocks is considerable.
  With experience, farmers can rank paddocks accurately -
that is, identify those with least and greatest pasture mass.
  What is more difficult is converting ranking to kg/ha DM
and this will be discussed in Section 7.4.   The most
obvious visual characteristic is pasture height, which has a
major influence on all visual assessments.   For a
particular sward, mass and height are related strongly,
although there are seasonal differences in these relationships
(Figure 7.2).   There can also be big differences owing to
plant species.   For example, for swards of the same height,
pasture mass decreases as the proportion of white clover
increases, and pastures that are browntop-dominant have much
higher mass than ryegrass swards because of their greater
density in the lower parts of the sward.  
  graph (Figure 7.2)    caption  
    As a guide, the pasture mass of intensively managed
sheep pastures is generally greater than 2500 kg/ha DM when
the leaves on the longer ryegrass tillers start to lie flat.
  Visual grading can be accurate, but for reliability,
regular calibration against some standards is necessary,
particularly in spring when DM percentage, leaf:stem ratio,
and dead material content change.   With set-stocking,
pasture height, rather than pasture mass, may be more useful
for feed planning, particularly if livestock feeding standards
are also expressed in the same units.   Pasture height has
not been measured regularly in New Zealand studies, but the
recommendations of Hodgson   et al.   (1986) in Table
7.3 for the United Kingdom are likely to apply to New Zealand
and elsewhere.  
        7.3.2 Rate of pasture production      
    Livestock managers require an estimate of the present
and future rates of pasture production.   Regular
assessments throughout a year can be useful to build up
historical data for a farm to help with predictions.   In
this chapter, rate of pasture production (kg/ha/day) refers to
the net increase in DM per unit area, without reference to
separate processes of growth or decay.   Rate of pasture
production is often loosely referred to as 'rate of growth',
but this is not strictly correct, as new pasture growth is
partly offset by losses from death and decay of old leaves and
stems&semi; pasture production is the material available for
grazing or mowing since the previous defoliation.  
    The chances of making accurate predictions are
influenced mainly by seasonal climatic variability.   As
soils in temperate regions are usually well charged with water
by the onset of spring growth, pasture production in early
spring is reliable.   Summer and early autumn growth is
least reliable because of wide fluctuations in effective
summer rainfall (Radcliffe and Baars, 1987).  
    Pasture production has been measured from more than 23
sites in New Zealand under standard conditions over periods of
at least five years (Radcliffe, 1974).   The average daily
pasture production rates for each month, together with
standard errors as a measure of variability between years
(Table 7.1), are often used to guide farmers when they are
predicting rates of pasture production.   The 'rate of
growth' measurement technique used to derive the information
in Table 7.1 has limitations, and the data should be
interpreted in relation to local soil fertility, current
weather conditions, and pasture management.   Mowers were
used to harvest production at a standard height of 25 mm, from
pasture pre-trimmed and then protected from grazing by cages.
  The growth period was 14 days except during periods of
very low production.   The use of a standard cutting
interval and height throughout the year does not always
reflect farm management practice&semi; for instance, longer
intervals between grazing or cutting usually give higher
production rates.   In general, rates of production in Table
7.1 tend to be conservative.  
    Current and recent pasture DM production per ha may be
calculated on farms by using pasture mass estimates for a
particular paddock.   For example, 1000 kg post-grazing mass
on 1 September and 2000 kg pre-grazing mass on 21 September
give a mean daily pasture production rate of 50 kg.
  Set-stocked pastures require an estimate of animal intake
and change in pasture cover over a given period.   Pasture
production may then be calculated as cover on 21 September
(1500 kg) minus cover on 1 September (1000 kg) plus 20 ewe
hoggets per ha at 1.0 kg DM intake per day for 20 days (400
kg) = 45 kg/ha/day.   Such production rate information is
useful for current feed planning and will be valuable for
prediction in future seasons.  
    Published and local pasture production records from
previous years are used to give a first guess when predicting
likely production rates.   Current soil temperature and,
more importantly, current soil moisture reserves, long-term
weather cycles, and medium-term and current weather forecasts
should all be compared with the average weather values and
given due consideration when predicting pasture production.
  Extra fertilizer, particularly nitrogen, may give a boost,
while withholding normal applications could slow production.
  Use of different pasture cultivars can change the pattern
of seasonal production.  
        7.3.3 Feeding value of pasture      
    The effects of animal behaviour on diet quality
(animals selecting green leaf and rejecting dead material),
and the influence of the greater nutritive value of white
clover (legumes) than of ryegrass (grasses) on livestock
production are fully discussed in Chapter 8.   These factors
are sufficiently important that they should be considered by
livestock managers when assessing pastures for feed
planning.  
    When the proportion of dead material is over 25 per
cent of the total, only the green portion should be assessed
when estimating pasture mass.   Grazing stock prefer to
avoid dead material, which, if eaten, is of low nutritive
value (7-8 MJ ME/kg DM).   Grazing sheep attempt to select
the green leaf from among the dead material, so that when the
quantity of dead material is great the green material is less
accessible and animal intake is restricted.   Under heavy
mob-stocking, when hard grazing to low pasture mass is
possible, much dead herbage is eaten.   However, the intake
per head is low (although a lot of material is removed per ha)
and the nutritive value of the diet will be low.   In some
extensive grazing systems in which stocking rate is low, for
example in much of Australia, the only feed available to stock
during the dry hot summer is the dried, dead, surplus pasture
grown in spring.   In such systems graziers accept
live-weight loss in their stock and rely on this low quality
diet for livestock survival.  
        7.3.4 Livestock production      
    Measurement of livestock production is essential to
check that the objective of planned feeding is achieved.
  Livestock production can also be used to predict pasture
intake, pasture mass, or pasture production.   Minson and
McDonald (1987) developed a reliable relationship
(r  2   = 0.995) for use with steers for estimating
pasture DM intake (I) (kg/day) from live-weight (L) (kg) and
live-weight change (G) (kg/day):
  formula    
    Dairy cows require 21-28 kg DM for each kg of milkfat
annually, depending on breed and breeding index.   Similar
calculations can be derived for sheep&semi; the annual pasture DM
intake for a ewe of about 55 kg live-weight, weaning 105 per
cent of lambs, is about 500 kg.   In New Zealand this is the
basis of a stock unit for assessing land carrying capacity,
which in turn is an assessment of annual pasture
productivity.    
          7.4 Indirect measurement of
pasture mass        
    We have seen that assessment of pasture mass is
central to management of pastoral systems or any research on
pasture or grazing management.   However, difficulties arise
because of the variability of pastures within grazed areas,
due mainly to inherent soil fertility differences, effects of
topography (for example, sunny or shady aspect), or
modifications resulting from the activities of grazing
animals.   Increased pasture growth in urine and dung
patches and rejection of growth near dung creates a mosaic of
small areas of high pasture mass.   Larger-scale spatial
variation occurs with nutrient transfer to stock camps where
pasture production may be 50 per cent more than that in the
larger depleted area of a paddock.   Animal treading creates
tracks which on steep hills become strongly linear patterns of
terraces and banks.  
    The methods of determining pasture mass discussed in
this section are non-destructive and indirect, and many
readings are made to give a mean that needs to be related to
pasture mass (kg/ha DM).   These methods are used by
commercial farmers and researchers.   The cutting of swards
for pasture mass measurement is discussed in Section 7.5.  
        7.4.1 Visual assessment of pasture
mass      
    Visual assessment techniques are used widely and vary
from highly structured objective methods to a casual walk
across a paddock to gain an impression of pasture mass.
  With experience, skilled observers can estimate pasture
mass reliably.   Relatively inexperienced students can
quickly become proficient in visually ranking areas for
pasture mass, but regular calibration against data obtained by
cutting is essential if the results are to be expressed in
kg/ha DM.   Pasture height has a major influence on visual
assessment, but the observer must also assess and integrate
the effects of density, DM per cent, leaf:stem ratio, and
species composition.  
    Density (kg/ha/cm pasture height) is related to
species composition, and recalibration against cut data is
required when changing between sward types.   DM percentage
and leaf:stem ratio change with season and their influence is
most notable in the spring, when most experienced operators
need to refer to cut data for reliable visual estimates.
  Pasture mass is usually underestimated in pastures with
high DM per cent.   Dead material can influence pasture mass
estimates, as it usually has a high DM content.   Where
visual assessments are being made for livestock feeding, it is
advisable to disregard the dead material and estimate the
quantity of green DM.  
    In a more formal method of visual assessment (Haydock
and Shaw, 1975), a number of reference quadrats are selected
to represent the range in pasture mass to be encountered, and
are each assigned a score on a 1-10 scale in ascending order
of pasture mass.   The paddock or area is then assessed
visually in a systematic manner.   More than 20 observations
are made and a score assigned to each by comparison with the
reference quadrats.   Subsequently, the reference quadrats
are rescored and cut, and from this the mean observation is
converted to kg/ha DM.   This method has been used
successfully in a variety of experimental situations,
particularly where topography, sward variability, or the area
to be covered make other methods less appropriate.   Baars
and Dyson (1981) found that it was preferable to score a
number of small plots within paddocks rather than attempt to
assess whole paddocks.  
        7.4.2 Height      
    Sward height is used more widely in Australia and the
United Kingdom (Maxwell and Treacher, 1987) where continuous
grazing is more common than in New Zealand.   Sward height
has seldom been measured or reported for pastures in New
Zealand grazing studies.   This omission is unfortunate, as
pasture height is easily measured and can be used for planning
livestock feeding (Table 7.3).   However, some recent New
Zealand studies on dairy pastures (Piggot, 1986) and hill
country (Webby and Pengelly, 1986) have shown that sward
height and pasture mass are related closely, although these
relationships change with season (Figure 7.2).  
    When measuring height the top of the sward is
difficult to define.   Is it the height of the tallest
reproductive tiller?   If a ruler is placed into the sward,
should the highest contact point be recorded or should the
maximum height of the leaf or stem nearest the ruler be
recorded?   To overcome these problems, various instruments
have been developed for measuring pasture height.  
    Disc meters have a plate of about 0.1m  2   area
that is either forced up by the sward (rising plate) or
lowered into the pasture (weighted disc).   Sward height is
determined by the height at which the plate is supported by
the pasture.   These meters overcome the problem of
determining the top of the sward.   They are also sensitive
to the density of the pasture as well as its height, and
strong relationships between disc meter and pasture mass have
been demonstrated (Stockdale, 1984&semi; L'Huillier and Thomson,
1988).   These meters offer a useful, non-destructive,
rapid, indirect method for grazing managers to assess pasture
mass.   However, at some stage they require calibrating
against cut data, and have limited use on hill country or
pugged pastures with an uneven ground surface.   Another
disadvantage of height and disc measurements is that each
reading must be manually recorded.   Earle and McGowan
(1979) described a rising plate meter called the Ellinbank
Pasture Meter, which can automatically record up to 100
pasture measurements so that the mean plate height can be more
rapidly determined.  
    Sward sticks have been designed to allow sward height
to be measured more consistently and easily.   A sward stick
is about 1.8 m long, and has a central metal rod, calibrated
in cm at eye level, which moves freely inside a tube with a
small transparent perspex plate (about 20 cm  2  ) fixed
to its base.   Measurements are taken by placing the
calibrated rod vertically in the pasture and lowering the
perspex plate on to the pasture canopy until several leaves
are touching the plate.   The height of the leaf canopy can
then be recorded without having to kneel.  
        7.4.3 Capacitance meter      
    The most sophisticated method for fast and
non-destructive measurement of pasture mass is the single
probe capacitance meter.   This was developed in Australia
(Vickery   et al.  , 1980&semi; Vickery and Nicol, 1982) for
rapid field sampling of many positions in a paddock or
research plot.   It is, however, a sensitive instrument
which requires more care and understanding than the more
robust height and disc meters.  
    The basic principle of the capacitance method is that
air has a low, and pasture a high, dielectric constant.   A
pasture probe measures the change in capacitance resulting
from replacing air by pasture.   An air reading is,
therefore, necessary before each series of pasture readings.
  If atmospheric conditions are changing rapidly, then more
frequent air readings are required.   Each pasture
capacitance reading is subtracted from the capacitance value
in air to give corrected meter readings.   When the probe is
held vertically in pasture, the sensing zone is most
responsive to pasture in an area circumscribed 100 mm around
the probe.   Beyond this, sensitivity weakens up to an outer
limit of 300 mm.   Readings are recorded automatically, and
the latest New Zealand pasture probe may be programmed to
convert the mean reading for a paddock to pasture mass (kg/ha
DM) by using an equation appropriate to the pasture being
measured.  
    The modern single-probe capacitance meter evolved
after about 30 years of intensive development from the rather
large and cumbersome 'Charlie' capacitance meters, which had
an array of probes mounted on a rectangular frame (Neal and
Neal, 1973).   The earlier instruments were more responsive
to water in plant material than to DM.   They therefore
estimated fresh weight more reliably than dry and were
influenced greatly by free moisture on pasture.   Vickery
and his coworkers not only developed a light, portable
capacitance meter, but their sensing probe design was
responsive to changes in capacitance caused by changes in leaf
surface area rather than moisture content.  
    Capacitance meters are sensitive to electrical
interference and should not be used near high tension lines,
in electrical storms, or touching electric fences.   At
best, false readings will occur&semi; at worst, the probe may be
damaged.   The sensitive lower 300 mm of the probe must be
waxed regularly (every 50-100 readings in dry pasture) to
prevent a film of moisture adhering to the surface.   More
frequent treatment with silicone wax allows the probe to be
used in wet pasture.   Batteries must, of course, be kept
charged.  
        7.4.4 Selecting a method for pasture mass
measurement      
    The choice of method will depend on personal
preference, cost of equipment, time available, and access to
laboratory facilities such as a drying oven and an accurate
balance.   Accuracy of pasture mass estimation is less
likely to influence choice of method, as accepted techniques
usually have similar precision when used competently.
  Seasonal changes in the sward mean that all indirect
methods need regular calibration by comparison with cut data.
  Changes with time in pasture content of dead material and
reproductive tillers are the main reasons for variations in
calibration relationships.   There have been numerous
comparisons of indirect methods for assessing pasture mass
using the double sampling procedure (Section 7.5.2).
  Moderately good relationships have been derived between
pasture cutting and most of the indirect non-destructive
methods, but these relationships have been specific for
methods, time and place, pasture type, weather conditions, and
person cutting the pasture.   More general relationships
are, therefore, needed by both farmers and researchers so that
calibration cuts are required only when the character of
pastures changes with season.  
    Thomson (1986) expressed concern at the conflicting
opinion and range of advice farmers were receiving from the
'experts' on pasture mass assessment.   He concluded that
with occasional calibration, visual assessment is probably the
most reliable method for estimating pasture mass.   The
rising plate meter was not as reliable as visual estimates or
the pasture probe, which was the most accurate method if
calibrated regularly.   Thomson further concluded that a
rapid method for assessing pasture dead matter would help
select appropriate equations for the probe, so that regular
calibration would be unnecessary.   This suggestion was made
because dead material proportions are likely to vary between
years, seasons, and regions, with differences in climate, and
between farms or even within farms depending on grazing
management.   The five separate equations for pasture
growing seasons suggested by the pasture probe manufacturer
account in a general way for changes in pasture stem, density,
and dead matter proportions, but they need to be used
intelligently.   Many farmers may, however, be content with
a reliable estimate of green pasture mass because of the low
feeding value of dead material and the likelihood that animals
will avoid eating it.  
    L'Hullier and Thomson (1988) showed a large variation
in calibrations of indirect methods between and within
seasons.   Most of the variation was caused by dead matter
content.   However, a distinct seasonal pattern in the
slopes of calibration regression equations and smaller
variations in slopes within seasons were shown (Table 7.4).
  This evidence gave further support to the concept of five
'pasture seasons' proposed by the manufacturers with their
probe equations, and also demonstrated by Webby and Pengelly
(1986) when relating sward height to pasture mass on hill
country (Figure 7.2).  
  table 7.4  
    Pasture species, wet pasture, and variations in
cutting to ground level affect the use of general
relationships for all indirect methods to some extent.   The
manufacturers suggest a separate equation for the capacitance
probe when measuring pastures containing subtropical grasses
such as   Paspalum dilatum.   Lucerne, browntop,
cocksfoot, or prairie grass pastures certainly present
difficulties to observers who are accustomed to visual
assessments in ryegrass-white clover.   L'Huillier and
Thomson (1988) found that both probe and rising plate meter
readings were affected by early morning dew or rain in pasture
with a mass greater than 3000 kg/ha DM.   The use of a
separate calibration equation for wet pasture reduced this
error.   The likelihood that any method of pasture
assessment would ever consistently exceed correlations of
r  2   = 0.90 seems unlikely because of errors
associated with the calibration cuts themselves.   Smeaton
and Winn (1981) showed that the standard deviation due to
cutting on hill country pastures would usually have a value of
about +/- 200 kg/ha.   The potential percentage error in
direct measurement of low pasture mass (for example,
post-grazing mass on dairy farms) is, therefore, relatively
high, but is more acceptable in measurements of high
mass.    
  

          13.3 Factors affecting nutrient
availability and uptake by plants      
    The main purpose of this section is to describe in
general terms the factors which affect nutrient availability
in soil.   Those factors, or processes, which affect
specific nutrients alone and those which have already been
described in detail in previous chapters, e.g. cation
exchange, will not be considered here.  
        13.3.1 Soil parent material and degree of
soil development      
    The total amount of many nutrients present in the soil
is determined by the original mineral composition of the
parent material (see Chapter 2).   Greywacke sandstone, for
example, has a relatively low phosphorus content compared with
limestone or basalt, and indeed crops grown on soils derived
from greywacke normally require phosphorus fertilizer (see
Chapter 19).  
    The release of nutrients from the parent material
minerals, depends on the extent of weathering of the soil, as
described in Chapter 2.   Once released from within a
mineral structure, the individual nutrients can either be
taken up by plants or they can be leached from the soil.   A
 'recent' soil derived from unweathered parent material will
generally have a higher fertility than one which has
experienced intensive leaching over a long period of time.
However, a soil of an intermediate age will have a higher
organic matter content and a greater degree of mineral
decomposition than a recent soil.   This usually means that
nutrient release and cycling is more intensive in intermediate
aged soils than in recent soils.   The complex effects of
soil development on nutrient forms and availability are
particularly well illustrated in the case of phosphorus (see
Figure 15.4 and Section 15.3).  
        13.3.2 Soil reaction (pH)      
    Soil acidity and alkalinity have been discussed in
Chapter 12 and liming practices will be described in Chapter
19.   This section will describe the profound effect that
soil pH has on the availability of nutrients to plants and
micro-organisms.  
    The relationships between soil pH and plant
availability of each of the essential plant nutrients are
shown in Figure 13.4.   Basic macronutrient cations
(Ca  2+  , Mg  2+  , Na  +   and
K  +  ) are usually found only in low amounts in acid
soils (low pH) because they have been displaced from cation
exchange sites by H  +   and Al  3+   ions and
subsequently leached from the soil.   The rate of removal of
these cations normally exceeds their rate of release by
mineral weathering, and deficiencies therefore occur in acid
soils.   As indicated by Figure 13.4, these nutrients are
most readily available in neutral or alkaline soils.
  Micronutrient cations (Fe  2+  , Cu  2+  ,
Mn  2+   and Zn  2+  ) are highly soluble at low
pH, and in acid soils some of these nutrients can be present
at levels which are toxic to the plant.   In acid soils high
levels of soluble iron and manganese can reduce plant growth
directly or through their effects on the availability of other
nutrients, especially phosphorus.   The levels of these
nutrients can be reduced by applying lime, and in neutral
soils (pH 6-7) they are present in optimum amounts.   With
over-liming, or in soils with a naturally high pH (above 7),
these nutrients may become deficient, as indicated by Figure
13.4.   There is therefore a narrow range of pH tolerance
for these micronutrients and this is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 18.  
    The change in availability of molybdenum with pH is
opposite to that of most of the other micronutrients, being
least available at low pH and most available at high pH.
  The main reason for liming many New Zealand soils is to
increase the availability of Mo to clovers in order to
increase nitrogen fixation (Chapter 14).  
    The availability of boron is low in acid soils because
under these conditions it is highly soluble and readily
leached.   In soils with a high pH, boron can be fixed by
clay and other soil components making it most available under
neutral conditions.  
  Figure 13.4: Relationship between soil pH and the relative
availability of individual nutrients  
  caption  
    Although aluminium is not an essential nutrient it can
have a large effect on plant growth.   In neutral soils,
aluminium is normally adsorbed by clay minerals, in the form
Al(OH)  2+   or Al(OH)  2    +  , and is not
an important influence.   However, in acid soils, aluminium
(as Al  3+  ) is released into soil solution and when
present in high concentrations (c. 0.5 &mu;g ml  -
1   in solution) it can become toxic to the plant.
  Plant root development, particularly in lucerne, is very
sensitive to high levels of aluminium in the soil.  
    The availability of soil phosphorus is strongly
influenced by soil pH.   The form of phosphate ion present
in the soil changes with pH, as described in Chapter 15, and
the amount of reaction of phosphate with other soil components
also changes with pH.   Under acid conditions the presence
of high levels of soluble iron, aluminium and manganese leads
to the precipitation of insoluble phosphate compounds.   In
addition, phosphate can be 'fixed' by hydrous oxides of iron
and aluminium and by certain silicate clays, which can also
reduce its availability (see Chapter 15 for details).
  Phosphate availability is shown in Figure 13.4 to be at a
maximum between pH 6 and 7 but to decrease again above this
range.   In alkaline soils phosphate reacts with calcium to
form insoluble tri-calcium phosphate
(Ca  3  (PO  4  )  2  ) and this reduces its
availability to the plant.  
    Nitrogen availability is at its lowest in acid soils
and this is partly due to the
    inhibiton    inhibition     of nitrification
as a result of the low activity of some soil bacteria.
  Although nitrification and nitrogen fixation are
restricted at low pH, release of ammonium nitrogen from soil
organic matter can still continue due to the ability of many
fungi to operate unhindered in acid soil conditions.   Other
soil organisms, such as earthworms and actinomycetes, are
sensitive to acid conditions and prefer a neutral pH.  
    Plants differ in their ability to tolerate acid or
alkaline soil conditions.   The preferred soil pH ranges for
selected plants are given in Table 13.3 and show that many
agricultural and horticultural crops favour slightly acid
conditions whilst some, such as lucerne and asparagus, need
neutral conditions to flourish.  
  Table 13.3: Optimum pH ranges of selected plants  
        13.3.3 Soil oxidation-reduction
processes      
      Respiration   by plants and soil microbes
provides energy by breaking down available carbohydrate, such
as glucose.   The respiration process involves the oxidation
of carbohydrate and the release of electrons, as summarized by
the following equation:
  Equation (13.1): [general equation for
respiration]    
    As described by Equation 13.1 above, under aerobic
conditions oxygen acts as the terminal electron acceptor for
the respiratory process.   Under anaerobic conditions,
however, when no oxygen is present, other substances have to
act as the electron acceptor.   These substances are then
said to be  'reduced' since they gain electrons (or lose
oxygen).   In the   oxidation-reduction (redox)
reaction   described by Equation 13.1, glucose is said to
be 'oxidized' since it loses electrons (and hydrogen
ions).  
    The effects of soil aeration on plant and microbial
respiration were described in Chapter 8.   The level of
reducing conditions present in an anaerobic soil is measured
by the   redox potential   of the system.   This
is generally assessed by measuring the voltage difference
between a platinum electrode and a reference (calomel)
electrode placed in the soil.   The equilibrium redox
potential (E  h   volts) is defined as:
  Equation (13.2): [the Nernst equation]  
where E  o   is the standard redox potential for a
hydrogen electrode, R is the gas constant, T is absolute
temperature, n is valency, F is the Faraday constant, (Ox) is
the concentration of oxidized substances, and (Red) is the
concentration of reduced substances.   This equation shows
that the redox potential, or E  h   value, decreases as
the concentration of reduced substances increases relative to
the concentration of oxidized substances.   A low potential,
or E  h   value, indicates a reducing system (i.e.
excess electrons) whilst a high E  h   value indicates
an oxidizing system (i.e. a lack of electrons).   Aerobic
soils generally have E  h   values of between 0.4 and
0.6 volts.   Anaerobic soils have E  h   values
between 0.2 and -0.4 volts.  
    Under anaerobic conditions the reduction of substances
other than oxygen can lead to a change in their availability.
  The sequence of reactions which occur when changing from
an aerobic condition to an increasingly anaerobic condition is
given in Table 13.4.  
    Once a soil is waterlogged, oxygen is rapidly removed,
usually within 1 to 2 days, allowing the other reactions
listed in Table 13.4 to proceed.   Nitrate, Mn  4+  ,
Fe  3+   and SO  4    2-   will all
eventually be reduced.   The system is said to be 'poised'
or buffered by each reaction until that oxidant is exhausted
and a lower redox potential is achieved.  
    Nitrate (NO  3    -  ) which is reduced to
nitrite (NO  2    -  ) is unstable under anaerobic
conditions and tends to be further reduced to nitrogen gas
resulting in its loss from the soil (see Chapter 14).
  Sulphate (SO  4    2-  ) is reduced to
hydrogen sulphide (H  2  S) at only very low redox
potentials and therefore occurs only under severely
waterlogged conditions.   Manganese and iron both increase
in solubility in anaerobic soils and can be found in high or
even toxic levels (see Chapter 18).  
    Anaerobic respiration processes can cause the pH of
the soil to change.   The redox equations listed in Table
13.4 show that hydrogen (H  +  ) ions can be removed
from the system under anaerobic conditions, and in acid soils
this can cause the pH to rise.   In alkaline soils, however,
the build up of CO  2   from the respiration process
(Equation 13.1) has a dominating effect and the pH tends to
drop under anaerobic conditions.   Most flooded soils
eventually develop a neutral pH between 6.7 and 7.2.  
    These changes in soil pH can have a considerable
effect on the availability of some nutrients (see Section
13.3.2).
Phosphorus and molybdenum can increase in availability
whilst zinc tends to become less available under neutral
conditions.   Although copper and cobalt usually decrease in
availability at higher pH levels, under anaerobic conditions
the solubilization of iron and manganese compounds can result
in an overall increase in availability of copper and cobalt
(see Chapter 18).  
  Table 13.4: Order of utilisation of principal electron
acceptors and the measured potentials of these reactions  
        13.3.4 Soil salinity      
    Plant growth in New Zealand is rarely affected by
saline soil conditions but in many parts of the world it is a
serious problem.   Soils are classified as
  saline   when the electrical conductivity of a
saturated soil extract is greater than 4 mS cm  -1  .
  High salt levels can occur naturally in arid and semi-arid
areas, when the high evaporation rate causes capillary rise to
bring salts to the soil surface, either from underground salt
deposits or from saline groundwater.   Saline soils can also
be created by applying irrigation water which has a high salt
content (not usually a problem in New Zealand) or through the
use of high rates of fertilizer in greenhouses where leaching
does not occur but evaporation rates are high.   Saline
soils usually have a pH less than 8.5 but are often called
  white-alkali   soils because of the surface
accumulation of salts.  
    The excessive levels of sodium, calcium and
magnesium chlorides or sulphates, which are found in
saline soils, can reduce the osmotic water potential in the
soil and this can lower the amount of water which is readily
available to the plant (see Chapter 6).   Plants growing in
saline soils, therefore, often exhibit signs of drought and
may even suffer from   plasmolysis   (the removal of
water from plant cells resulting in their collapse).   Some
plants called   halophytes   are able to absorb high
levels of salt without damage, and as this lowers the plant
osmotic water potential it assists with water uptake.   The
order of tolerance of selected plants is given in Table 13.5
but it must be emphasized that the stage of growth is also
important.  
    Saline soils which have a high   exchangeable
sodium percentage   (ESP), representing over 13% of the
total cation exchange capacity, and a pH above 8.5 are called
  sodic   soils.   The high pH arises from the
hydrolysis of sodium carbonate (Equation 13.3), and can have a
large effect on the availability of plant nutrients (see
Section 13.3.2).  
  Equation (13.3): [hydrolysis of sodium carbonate]  
    Plant growth can also be reduced through the effects
of collapsed soil structure brought about by the high sodium
levels and the dissolution of organic matter at high pH.
  These soils are sometimes called
  black-alkali   soils, because the dark coloured
colloidal organic matter is often finely dispersed throughout
the soil profile.  
      Saline - sodic   soils represent an
intergrade between the two soils described above and have
    a    an     ESP greater than 13% but a pH less
than 8.5.   Plant growth is still affected by the high salt
levels and the loss of soil structure brought about by the
high sodium levels.    
        13.3.5 Quantity and intensity
(Q/I)      
    Nutrient availability strongly depends on the ability
of a soil to maintain a critical concentration of nutrient in
the soil solution.   A soil will be able to support
continued plant growth only if the nutrients removed from the
soil solution by the plant are rapidly replaced by the soil.
  The amount of available nutrient in the soil is termed the
  quantity   of nutrient (Q) and its concentration
in soil solution is termed the   intensity   of the
nutrient (I).   The quantity factor generally represents the
readily exchangeable nutrients, readily soluble nutrients and
other   labile   sources of nutrient.  
    The ability of the soil to maintain a constant level
of nutrient in solution depends on the   buffer
capacity   of the soil and reflects how the solution
concentration (I) changes with quantity (Q) as illustrated for
the different
  Table 13.5: Salt tolerance ratings of various crops  
soils in Figure 13.5.   Soil A has a high buffer capacity
and
despite removal of a certain amount of nutrient
(&DELTA;Q) shows only a small change in nutrient
concentration in solution (&DELTA;I).   Soil B has a
low buffer capacity and shows a large change in nutrient
concentration with the removal of the same amount of nutrient.
  The buffer capacity of the soil can be expressed as the
ratio of &DELTA;Q/&DELTA;I.   The higher the
ratio the greater the buffer capacity and the greater the
ability of the soil to maintain a continuous supply of
nutrient for plant growth.  
        13.3.6 Soil solution concentration,
diffusion and mass flow      
    The composition and concentration of the soil solution
is varied and depends on a number of soil properties, such as
parent material, fertilizer additions, pH, plant uptake, and
moisture content.   For example, acid soils generally have
lower nutrient concentrations than alkaline soils and dry
soils generally have higher concentrations than wet soils.
  A list of ion concentrations in soil solution is given in
Table 13.6.   Calcium and magnesium concentrations are
relatively high.   Nitrate concentrations can be very high
in some soils but are subject to rapid fluctuations due to
plant uptake, leaching and other soil processes.   Phosphate
concentrations are generally very low.  
    The composition of the soil solution and the
concentration of nutrients in solution can vary from one
location to another within the soil.   Concentration
gradients arise because of nutrient uptake by plant roots or
micro-organisms, or through nutrient addition in the form of
fertilizer or localized release from soil organic matter.  
  Figure 13.5: Quantity/Intensity (Q/I)
relationship[s]...  
      Diffusion   - Concentration gradients in
the soil tend to be reduced by the process of diffusion.
  This process was described in detail in Chapter 7 and is
an essential mechanism for providing a supply of nutrients to
the plant root.   As the plant absorbs nutrients from the
soil solution the local ion concentration around the root
decreases and a concentration gradient is created (see Figure
13.6).   According to   Fick 's Law  , which
describes diffusion, the larger the concentration gradient the
more rapid the rate of diffusion:
  Equation (13.4): [Fick 's 1st law]  
where   J    d   is the diffusive flux (mass
diffusing across a unit area per unit time),
  D    s   is the diffusion coefficient which
depends on the soil moisture content (&theta;), and
d  c  /d  x   is the concentration gradient.  
    The diffusion coefficient (  D    s  )
also depends on (i) the type of ion or solute, (ii) the
tortuosity of the diffusion pathway, and (iii) the adsorption/
desorption capacity of the soil.  
    Since most solutes must diffuse through water held in
soil pores it is easy to understand why an increased soil
moisture content can increase the diffusion rate.   In a
soil with a low water content, diffusion is reduced because of
the smaller number of pores filled with water and thus the
smaller area for diffusion.   The effect of tortuosity on
diffusion has been described in Chapter 8 but basically
represents whether the solute can take a straight or a winding
path through the soil.   Tortuosity depends on the moisture
content and the structure of the soil.   Adsorption and
desorption of solutes by soil particles can also affect the
rate of diffusion.  
  Figure 13.6: Nutrient concentration gradient around a
plant root  
      Mass flow   - When plant transpiration
rates are high, a relatively large amount of water will be
moving towards the roots.   This water can carry with it, by
mass flow, various amounts of nutrients.   The rate of
transport by mass flow, or convection, depends on the rate of
water flow and the concentration of the nutrient in the
solution (see Equation 7.11).   Nitrate, for example is
often present in high concentrations and the majority of the
nitrate taken up by the plant is transported by mass flow.
  Some ions, for example, Ca  2+   and Mg  2+  ,
are present in such high concentrations in soil solution
(Table 13.6) that mass flow can result in an accumulation of
these ions around the root if the rate of supply exceeds
demand of the plant.   Other ions which are present in low
concentrations, such as phosphate, cannot be supplied rapidly
enough by mass flow and therefore depend on diffusion as the
main mechanism of supply to plants.  
        13.3.7 Plant root growth and
morphology      
    The amount of water and nutrients which are available
to a plant are influenced by the depth and surface area of
rooting system which it can develop.   Although root growth
and morphology are genetically controlled, other factors, such
as climate, soil water content, soil aeration and soil
strength, also have an effect.   In addition, the
concentration of nutrients in the soil can influence the root
morphology.   High concentrations of some nutrients (e.g.
NO  3    -  ) can cause root growth to proliferate
whilst high levels of salts and other chemicals (e.g. ammonia)
can restrict root development.  
    The plant nutrient demand per unit root length is
normally highest in the early stages of plant growth.
  Eventually however, as a more extensive root system
develops, the total nutrient uptake potential of the root
system exceeds the plant demand.   Normally only part of the
root system is in contact with the soil solution yet the full
nutrient demand of the plant is able to be met by this small
proportion of the roots.   Root hairs are particularly
important because they increase the root surface area and the
amount of contact between the root and the soil.  
        13.3.8 Root
    rhizophere    rhizosphere    
effects      
    As roots grow through the soil they lose some of their
outer tissues.   This process, called  'sloughing off', and
another involving the direct exudation of organic material
into the soil, can provide a source of carbon for soil
micro-organisms to feed on.   During the growth of the
plant, over half of the total carbon translocated from the
leaves to the roots may be released into the soil through
these processes.   This can have a considerable effect on
the soil environment immediately around the root (a distance
of approximately 1-2 mm).   This zone, called the root
  rhizosphere  , has a large influence on the
availability of nutrients to the plant and can allow plants
  photos: colour plates (8 pages)  
  captions  
  Table 13.6: Average ion concentrations in the soil
solution of some New Zealand topsoils   
to obtain nutrients under normally deficient conditions.  
    The rhizosphere also contains a slime material called
  mucigel  , which covers the root and helps to
improve the contact between the root and the soil.   Mucigel
consists mostly of polysaccharides and other organic compounds
which bacteria and other micro-organisms can feed on.   The
microbial activity in the root rhizosphere is therefore far
greater than in the bulk soil and the availability and
turnover of plant nutrients is considerably higher.
  Free-living nitrogen fixing bacteria, for example, thrive
in the rhizosphere and may contribute large amounts of
available nitrogen to the plant.   Organic acids and
chelates produced in the
    rhizophere    rhizosphere     can help to
dissolve some nutrients and make them more available to the
plant.  
    The pH of the rhizosphere may be significantly
different to the pH of the bulk soil and this can also
influence the availability of nutrients, especially P, in the
immediate vicinity of the plant root (Section 13.3.2).
  When plants take up an excess of cations, such as
NH  4    +  , they excrete H  +   ions and
thus decrease the pH of the root rhizosphere.   When plants
take up an excess of anions, such as NO  3    -  ,
they excrete OH  -   ions which causes the rhizosphere
pH to rise.   The pH of the rhizosphere is thus strongly
related to the form of mineral nitrogen supply, and may be up
to one pH unit lower or higher than the bulk soil, depending
on whether the dominant form of N supply is as
NH  4    +   or NO  3    -  
respectively.  
        13.3.9 Mycorrhizae effects      
    Plant roots can develop a   symbiotic
association   with mycorrhizal fungi and this can be
particularly important for plant nutrition in low fertility
soils.   There are two groups of mycorrhizal fungi, both of
which assist the plant to obtain nutrients in return for their
supply of carbon from the root.  
    (i)   Ectotrophic mycorrhizae   live outside
the root cortex and form a sheath of fungal hyphae about 50
/&mu;m thick around the root.   This sheath increases
the surface area of the root and this, in addition to the
fungal hyphae 's ability to penetrate very small soil pores,
enhances the effectiveness of the root system.   The fungus
is also able to store nutrients, notably phosphorus, in its
tissues and can release this to the plant when soil nutrient
availability is low.   Ectotrophic mycorrhizae are
particularly important for increasing the amount of phosphorus
available to trees growing in low fertility forest soils.  
    (ii)   Endotrophic mycorrhizae   infect the
cells of the root cortex and form both an internal network of
hyphae as well as an external growth of hyphae.   The most
important type of fungal infection is called   vesicular
arbuscular   (V-A) mycorrhiza (Figure 13.7).   V-A
mycorrhizal infection of plant roots is particularly important
in low fertility soils where it can increase the amount of
phosphorus available to the plant.   The external hyphae
effectively increases the size of the root system and can
transfer phosphate from the bulk soil outside the immediate
vicinity of root.   Nitrogen fixation and micronutrient
nutrition are also increased by mycorrhizal infection of the
root.  
        13.3.10 Nutrient cycling      
    In undisturbed soil/plant communities, a large
proportion of the nutrients taken up by plants are eventually
returned to the soil as plant litter.   In this way,
nutrients can be recycled time and time again through the
soil/plant system.   Cycling of nutrients through the
vegetation helps to counteract the tendency of nutrients 
  Figure 13.7: Schematic diagram of the association of V-A
mycorrhizal fungi with a plant root  
to be leached from the soil in drainage water.   Deep-rooted
plants can bring up nutrients from considerable depths in the
soil and, in time, nutrients can become concentrated in the
surface horizons of the soil.  
    When the natural vegetation is removed to grow
agricultural crops, this process of nutrient cycling is
interrupted.   Nutrients are then removed from the soil
permanently in the form of crop and animal products.   Even
the most fertile soils cannot continue to lose nutrients in
this way indefinitely and, if agricultural production is to be
sustained, essential nutrients must be replaced by means of
fertilizers.  
    Nutrient losses are generally greater where arable
crops are grown compared to livestock production systems.
  In the latter, many of the nutrients taken up by pasture
plants and ingested by grazing animals are returned to the
soil in dung and urine.   Recycling of nutrients through the
animal is extremely important for the maintenance of soil
fertility of grazed pastures.  
    The effects of soil organic matter on nutrient storage
and release have been described in detail in Chapter 10, but
it is also emphasized here because in many soils the
availability of some nutrients, such as nitrogen, phosphorus
and sulphur, is strongly dependent on
mineralization/immobilization processes.   The rate of
release of nutrients from the organic pool is dependent on
such factors as soil temperature, water content, aeration, pH
and carbon content.  
    Leaching can have a major effect on nutrient cycling
and availability, even within a single growing season.   The
rate of leaching depends on the rate of water movement through
the soil and the concentration of the nutrient in the soil
solution (see Chapter 7 for a detailed discussion).
  Anionic forms of nutrients such as
NO  3    -   and SO  4    2-   are
mainly found in the soil solution and are therefore
particularly susceptible to leaching.   Cation nutrients,
such as K  +   and Mg  2+  , are less susceptible
to leaching because of cation exchange processes.
  Nevertheless, cations can still be lost from soil in
sufficiently large amounts to cause a nutrient deficiency in
some situations.    
  

        A REVISION OF ATTENUATION RELATIONSHIPS FOR
MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY IN NEW ZEALAND EARTHQUAKES    
    D.J. Dowrick    1      
    1     Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research, Lower Hutt, New Zealand (Member NZNSEE)
    
      SUMMARY    
      This study of attenuation of Modified Mercalli
intensity in New Zealand earthquakes used a carefully selected set
of isoseismal maps from 30 events with magnitudes ranging from
M  L   = 5.0 to M  S   = 7.8, and depths ranging from
very shallow to 65 km.   A completely revised set of magnitudes
was used.   A two-step stratified regression analysis was used to
evaluate the coefficients of the expression for intensity   formula  
where r is the mean slope radius corresponding to the distance from
the isoseismal to the centroid of the fault rupture surface.
  The resulting expressions model events of all depths very well,
and completely revise the attenuation curves of earlier work done
in the 1970 's in which depth was not taken into account.   The
earlier proposals for regional variations in attenuation were not
substantiated, the apparent differences for most of the country
being explained by the effects of depth and source mechanism rather
than path characteristics.   The attenuation character of the
Central Volcanic Region and Fiordland remain to be properly
established.   Attenuation of intensity in New Zealand was found
to be very similar to that for Turkey, the two regions being
dominated by strike-slip faulting.    
      1 INTRODUCTION    
    The subjective felt intensity scales remain a valuable,
indeed necessary, measure of strength of ground shaking in
earthquakes despite the growth in numbers of strong-motion
accelerographs in recent decades.   For many years it has been
the practice in New Zealand to use the Modified Mercalli (MM)
scale, slightly adapted in 1965 to suit New Zealand conditions as
described by Eiby
  [1,2]  .    references      
    The attenuation of MM intensity in New Zealand earthquakes
was investigated in the mid-1970 's by   Smith   [3,4]   and
less comprehensively by Walley   [5]  .
    references        reference  
     Some subsequent earthquakes have suggested that
Smith 's attenuation models needed to be reviewed, in particular
with specific examination of the effects of depth and source
mechanism, and a review of the magnitudes of the events in the data
set.   In recent years it had become obvious that the magnitudes
of New Zealand 's larger earthquakes needed to be re-assessed on a
consistent basis.   This necessary first step has recently been
completed using the surface-wave scale   [6,7]  .
    references       In addition the New
Zealand Seismological Observatory had revised the estimated local
magnitude M  L   for most of the events of interest since
1956, as reported elsewhere   [6]  .
    reference       Together these newly
available M  S   and M  L   values differ in all but
three cases from the values available to Smith.  
    The attenuation of intensity, I, may be expressed in the
following form 
  equation (1)  
where a, b, c, d are coefficients, M is magnitude, and r is the
mean radius (in km) of the isoseismal for intensity I.   Here r
is taken as the distance to the effective energy centre at
effective depth h  e   defined later.  
    Equation (1) is a form of expression previously used for
attenuation of intensity, eg   Ambraseys'   study   [8,
9]   of earthquakes in Turkey, or for the attenuation of peak
ground acceleration, a  max  , where log a  max   is
substituted for I, as in Joyner and Boore 's study   [10]  
of Californian ground motion recordings.
    references        reference  
    
      2 EVENTS STUDIED    
    For this study the basic data were selected isoseismal maps
of events for which instrumentally determined (ie 20th Century)
magnitudes were available.   The maps came from various sources,
ie NZ Seismological Observatory annual reports, papers on specific
earthquakes   [Refs 11-17]  , and unpublished maps prepared
by G A Eiby of the NZ Seismological Observatory.
    references       The isoseismals had to
be reasonably complete and be adequately supported by local
intensity observations.   At least four isoseismals per event
were desirable for establishing the shape of the attenuation curve
over as great a distance as possible. 
  Figure 1  
  caption  
  The mean radius &rmacron; for any given isoseismal was
found as the average of the radii along 16 points of the compass as
shown in Figure 1 in relation to the isoseismals for the 1968
Inangahua earthquake of M  s   = 7.4.   This map
illustrates the difficulty of determining reliable values of
&rmacron; for New Zealand earthquakes.   Because the land
mass is narrow, some of the isoseismals are incomplete on most
event maps.   Incomplete isoseismals were used only if the rest
of the map was complete enough for missing sectors of isoseismals
and the effective centre of the isoseismal pattern to be inferred
with reasonable confidence.   This meant that the inner
isoseismals had to be reasonably well determined over a sector of
the compass of at least 180&deg;.   In Figure 1 the
three inner isoseismals are complete and the general pattern
suggests an axis of
  Figure 2  
  caption  
approximate symmetry in the direction N40&deg;E (approx.).
  The missing eastern sections of the MM4 and MM5 isoseismals
were interpolated following the shape of isoseismals MM6 to MM10 as
shown.  
    These minimum requirements for using incomplete isoseismals
resulted in the rejection of most of those event maps where the
epicentre was offshore.   For example the earthquake of 27
December 1961 (Figure 2) had its centre obviously too far offshore
for determining half the isoseismal pattern.   The 10 May 1962
earthquake (Figure 3) was a marginal case, there presumably being
just under half of the isoseismals, as the epicentre (reasonably
well-determined) was just offshore from the relatively straight
coastline of the South Island.   Two other marginal cases were
the 30 January 1956 and 31 May 1977 earthquakes which were included
despite having offshore epicentres.   The reasons for their
inclusion are discussed later (see Central Volcanic Zone, Section
3.1).  
    The above selection criteria resulted in 30 events with
adequate isoseismal maps being chosen for the final regression
analyses, the epicentral locations being plotted on Figure 4.
  The main characteristics of these events are listed in Table 1,
where the magnitudes are seen to range from M  L   = 5.0 to
M  S   = 7.8.   Ideally the magnitude used in equation (1)
would be moment magnitude M  W  , but M  W   was
available for only seven of the 30 events.   Hence M  S  
or M  L   was used as shown in Table 1.   As discussed
elsewhere   [7]  , for shallow New Zealand events
M  S   is better     that    than    
M  L   as a measure of earthquake size for M
&gteq; 6.
    reference       In practice I have
adopted the larger of M  S   and M  L   where good
values of both were available.  
    We note that the isoseismals on the unpublished maps
(Events 1-10 in Table 1)
  Figure 3  
  caption  
  Figure 4  
  caption  
  Table 1  
have been derived by G A Eiby by converting maps originally
prepared in the Rossi-Forel intensity scale.   As such they are
slightly approximate MM isoseismals, so comparison was made of the
attenuation expressions obtained from Events 11-30 with those from
the entire data set.   No significant difference was found,
either visually from comparative plots of the regression
expressions or from the statistical t-test.  
    Because New Zealand earthquakes originate at widely varying
depths, so as to express attenuation in terms of a consistent
measure of travel path length, it was decided to base the
attenuation expression on distance from the centre of energy
release.   The depth of the latter is here termed the
  effective depth h  e  ,   which may be approximated
as the depth of the centroid of the rupture surface, defined
generally (for upwards rupturing faults) simply as
  equation (2)  
where h is the focal depth (from Table 1), and W  z   is the
width of the vertical projection of the rupture surface.   In a
few cases it was assumed that h  e   = h   [7]  .
    reference       Thus the radius r in
equation (1) becomes 
  equation (3)  
where r  h   is the horizontal distance in kilometres from
the isoseismal I to the centre of the isoseismal pattern.  
    The mean horizontal radii r  h   for all isoseismals
are given in Table 2, together with the preferred value of
    he    h  e       for the 30 events used in
the regression analyses.   The sources of the depths and
uncertainties have been further discussed elsewhere
  [7]  .     reference       It is
noted that the radius for MM10 for Event No. 3 given in Table 2 has
been revised to about half that on the existing map due to a review
of landslide evidence which had earlier been misinterpreted (G
Hancox et al, DSIR, Lower Hutt, pers. comm. 1990).   Values of
epicentral intensity I  o   were included for a few events,
where they could reasonably be inferred.   These extra data were
hoped to enrich the data set, but were found to have no substantive
effect on the results, although their inclusion was
preferred.    
      3 RESULTS 0F REGRESSION ANALYSES    
    As described elsewhere   [21]  , the coefficients
in equation (1) were evaluated using a two-step multiple regression
analysis of the type preferred by Joyner and Boore
  [22]  .
    reference        reference  
     Analyses were made of various selections of the
events described in Tables 1 and 2, examining the significance of
the following factors:
    &bullet; source mechanism 
  &bullet; regional variation 
  &bullet; depth.    
    The study of source mechanisms showed that the events
having Normal and Strike-slip fault mechanisms had no significant
difference in attenuation behaviour, but that events with reverse
fault mechanisms gave rise to intensities which were several
percent higher than those of Normal and Strike-slip events for the
same magnitude and distance.   This part of the study has been
described in detail elsewhere   [21]  , and produced the
following mean regression curves: 
  equation (4)  
  equation (5)  
    reference      
    These expressions were derived from data with magnitudes in
the range M  L   = 5 to M  S   = 7.8 and distances
r  h   &lteq; 500 km, and hence
should be used with caution near either end of these ranges.
  The significance of regional variation and depth are considered
in turn below.  
      3.1   Regional Variations in
Attenuation      
    The analyses of earthquakes in different parts of New
Zealand carried out earlier by Smith   [3,4]   suggested to
him that attenuation was different in three regions A, B and C
shown in Figure 4.     references    
  Recently he has proposed   [23]   a further subdivision
(not shown here) of the northern part of Region B which includes
the Central Volcanic Zone (CVR).
    reference       As mentioned earlier
Smith did not consider the depth or focal mechanism of the
earthquakes in his data set.   Let us now compare the attenuation
of the events located in Regions A and B, considering only Normal
and Strike-slip mechanisms which have been shown elsewhere
  [21]   to have virtually identical attenuation
expressions.    reference      
    For the regression analyses, for Zone A we use Events 7, 9,
14, 19, 25 and 30, which data set has a mean magnitude M = 6.3 and
a mean depth h  e   = 20 km, while for Zone B we use Events
7, 11, 13, 15 and 26 which data set has a mean magnitude M = 6.0
and mean depth h  e   = 17 km.   Using the t-test it was
found that   the   difference between the resulting attenuation
expressions for Zones A and B was not statistically
significant.  
    Now turning to Smith 's Region C, because it is in the
mountainous south-west corner of the country (Figure 4) the inner
isoseismals are poorly determined due to unpopulated mountainous
terrain, and the outer isoseismals are very incomplete.   Hence
only two Events (8 and 18) were found which had maps with four
isoseismals which satisfied the rules of adequacy described in
Section 2.0 (indeed Event No. 8 was only marginally acceptable).
  As two events do not enable us to obtain a regression
expression of adequate robustness, it was decided instead to
compare the data from these events with expressions derived from
appropriate events chosen from the rest of the data set.   As
Event No. 8 has depth h  e   = 60 km, it was compared with a
regression of a set of deeper events with depths 30
&lteq; h  e  
&lteq; 65 (ie, Events 7, 10, 13-16, 21),
and Event No. 18 has depth h  e   = 35 km so it was compared
with a set of events with depths 22
&lteq; h  e  
&lteq; 43 (ie, Events 7, 10, 13-15,
25).  
    In Figure 5 the mean regression curve drawn for (M = 7,
h  e   = 60) is compared with the I, r data points for Event
No. 8, and the curve for (M = 6.2, h  e   = 35) is compared
with the 
  Table 2  
  Table 2 cont.  
  Figure 5  
  caption  
I, r data points for Event No. 18.   The curves and data points
for both these events are obviously very similar.   The
isoseismal maps for both events also suggest that the epicentral
intensity (at say r  h   = 2 km) would be about MM7, again
the same as given by the regression curves.   (These two events
are also modelled well by equations (4) and (5) which are based on
larger data sets.)   Thus these two events suggest that the
attenuation in Region C is likely to be the same as the rest of the
country.   However, more evidence is required to enable firm
conclusions to be drawn.  
    Next we turn our attention to the Central Volcanic Region
in the North Island (Figure 4).   Here we again have few good
data.   Of the three events (Nos. 12, 28, 29) listed as CVR
events, No. 12 and No. 28 both have offshore epicentres so that the
isoseismal radii given in Table 2 are less certain than desired.
  As noted in Section 2 these two events were marginal for
adequacy, but were included in the hope that they might help give
some indication of attenuation rates in the CVR.   As noted in
Table 2 the isoseismal data for Event 12 has been supplemented by
including an estimated epicentral intensity
    Io    I  o       &approx; 9
at r  h   = 2 km in an attempt to improve the analysis.
  The Edgecumbe earthquake (Event 30) was a marginal fourth
contender for CVR membership, as it was located on its boundary.
  However it was excluded from the CVR and has been shown
elsewhere   [21]   to conform well to the attenuation
pattern of the rest of the
country.    reference      
    A regression analysis of the data from the three events
(12, 28, 29) was carried out, but gave unsatisfactory results, both
with and without the inclusion of the I  o   data point for
events 28 and 29.   So, as with Region C above, the I, r data of
the three events were compared with attenuation curves of
appropriate M and h  e   derived data from shallow N+SS
events from the rest of the country, equation (4).   The results
of this comparison were not very conclusive.   Event No. 28 data
points matched the model curve quite well while Event No. 29 data
points (the most reliable of the three events) indicated a more
rapid rate of attenuation than that given by the model curve
(Figure 6).   This difference in attenuation rate from the rest
of the country is likely to be due to anelastic attenuation, and is
of a similar value to that found earlier for the CVR by Haines
  [24]  .     reference       It is
clear however that more data is required before the intensity
attenuation rate in this region can be properly assessed.  
      3.2   Depth and Magnitude Effects      
    The effects of magnitude and depth changes on attenuation
are illustrated by plotting curves for events of two depths for
both M = 5 and M = 7.5, using the expression for N+SS events,
equation (4).   The increase in magnitude from M = 5 to M = 7.5
causes an increase in intensity of 3-4 units over the full distance
range shown on Figure 8.   We also see that an increase in depth
from h  e   = 8 to 45 km decreases the central intensity by
approximately 2 units from MM10 to MM8 for M = 7.5 events, denoting
a change from a strongly damaging to a modestly damaging event.  

  Figure 6  
  caption  
  Figure 7  
  caption  
  Figure 8  
  caption  
  Figure 9  
  caption  
    Figure 7 shows that an average shallow magnitude 5 event (N
or SS source mechanism) is at the lower limit of engineering
nterest, having a central intensity of only MM7.   If such an
event was of     he    h  e       = 30 km the
maximum intensity on average would be only MM5.  
      3.3   Comparison of Event Data with Regression
Curves      
    In Figure 8 we plot the isoseismal radii for the relatively
deep Strike-slip Event No. 16 with its appropriate mean curve for
M = 6.2 and h  e   = 50 km derived from equation (4). In this
example, we see that the model and the five data points match very
well, and note the maximum local intensity reported in this
earthquake was MM6 which also conforms with the central intensity
of the model.   As seen on Figure 4 this event was centred well
inland and the centre of the isoseismals was well determined.
  By contrast we will now consider the 1962 Westport earthquake
which had an offshore fault rupture (Figure 3) and was considered
to be only marginally acceptable for use in the regression analysis
(as discussed in Section 2). As seen in Figure 9 the outer four
isoseismal data points lie very close to the mean regression curve
for this reverse fault event derived from equation (5) using M =
5.9 and h  e   = 8 km, but the two inner isoseismals (MM6,
MM7) show moderate deviations from the mean line.   As may be
seen from Figure 3 these inner isoseismals are susceptible to
relatively large errors when estimating their mean radii, because
their "true" shape is known for perhaps only 100-120&deg;
of arc about the real but uncertain 
  Figure 10  
  caption  
centre (instead of the desired minimum of 180&deg;).  
    We now compare the isoseismal data for an event with
uncertain fault mechanism, ie, the 1976 Korakonui earthquake (Event
27) of M = 5.1 and h  e   = 3 km.   The earthquake was
thought equally likely to be of Reverse or Strike-slip fault
mechanism, so in Figure 10 we compare the appropriate mean curves
from equations (4) and (5) with the data points.   At the time of
its occurrence the intensities of this earthquake were thought to
be anomalously high   [14]  .
    reference       However, with the
benefit of our new attenuation relationships, it is evident from
Figure 10 that this would not be the case if the event had a
reverse fault mechanism.   We note that the isoseismal map
  [14]   had a small isoseismal for MM8 (of c. 5 km radius)
but which was very much off centre.
    reference       It was evidently a
local microzoning effect and not part of the main attenuation
pattern, and hence is not plotted in the figure.  
      3.4   Comparison of Attenuation in New Zealand
and Turkey      
    Turkey is a tectonic region which, like New Zealand, is
dominated by strike-slip faulting.   Ambraseys   [8,9]  
had studied the attenuation of intensity in Turkey for events with
focal depths &lteq; 15 km, using the same
form of expression used here.
    references       The Turkish intensity
data is in the MSK scale which conveniently is essentially directly
equivalent to the MMI scale.   Inverting   Ambraseys'  
equation (1) for Turkey   [8]   we have 
  equation (6)  
  Figure 11  
  caption  
    reference      
    As equation (6) includes events of all source
mechanisms, to obtain a quick and reasonably accurate comparison
with attenuation in New Zealand let us assume that one third of the
Turkish events were of predominantly reverse fault type.   The
New Zealand expression for this mixture of source mechanisms was
found (approximately) by merging equations (4) and (5) weighted 2/3
and 1/3 respectively, resulting in 
  equation (7)    
    Equations (6) and (7) should thus represent
reasonably comparable data bases from Turkey and New Zealand, and
attenuation curves for M = 5.5 and 7.0 with h  e   = 5 km are
plotted for both regions in Figure 11 (h  e   = 5 km
corresponds approximately to the mean effective depth of the focal
depth range for   Ambraseys'   Turkish data noted above).
  It is clear that Figure 11 shows that attenuation in New
Zealand and Turkey is very similar, which in view of the similar
geological regimes, gives mutual support to these two independent
studies.  
      4 ISOSEISMAL SHAPE    
    In the 1970 's Smith   [3,4]   examined the shapes
of the isoseismals which he approximated to ellipses, and found
values for the ratio a/b where a and b are the semi-diameters of
the major and minor axes respectively.
    references       He plotted the
geographical distribution of these ratios.   I have made a
preliminary examination of the isoseismal shapes and find that no
convincing systematic pattern may be readily described.   Further
study of this factor is proposed for a later date.  
      5 ESTIMATES OF MAGNITUDE FROM ISOSEISMAL
DATA    
    For early earthquakes for which no instrumental magnitude
is available, estimates of magnitude may be made if reasonable
isoseismal maps are available.   This is done simply by inverting
the appropriate attenuation expression such as equation (4) or (5)
above, and finding M  I   for the I,   r   pair of each
isoseismal, then finding the average M from all M  I  
available for the event concerned.  
    I have applied this procedure to two large 19th century
earthquakes for which isoseismal maps have been prepared.   These
were the Marlborough earthquake of 1848 October 16
  [25,26]   and the Wairarapa earthquake of 1855 January 23
  [27]  .
    references        reference  
     Taking the depth and source mechanism into
account my best estimates of the magnitude of these events are M
&approx; 7.9 and 8.4 respectively.   These values
are considerably greater than earlier magnitude estimates as shown
for comparison in Table 3.  
    Such estimates of the magnitudes of these two earthquakes
should be treated with caution, because (a) they are derived from
isoseismal maps based on sparse data in the early days of European
settlement of New Zealand, and (b) they involve extrapolation from
the magnitude range of the data on which equations (4) and (5) were
based.   Also given in Table 3 is the estimated moment magnitude
M  W   = 8.2 obtained from dislocation modelling studies
  [28]   of regional uplift during the 1855 Wairarapa
event.     reference       This estimate
also has to be treated with caution because of uncertainties in the
uplift data available from the early period.  
  Table 3  
        6 CONCLUSIONS    
    This study involved the use of a completely revised set of
magnitudes for all the events in the data base, and included
studies of the effects of depth, source mechanism and regional 
location.   The attenuation expression used was of the form
  equation  
where r is the slope distance from the isoseismal to a point below
the centre of the isoseismal pattern at the effective depth
h  e   of the centroid of the fault rupture surfaces.   The
conclusions reached were as follows:
1      The findings of this study completely revise the
results of earlier studies.    
2      Depth was shown to have a major influence on the
resulting attenuation expressions, which worked well for all events
in the data set which had events of effective depths h  e  
&lteq; 65 km.    
3      The comparison of attenuation in different
regions found no difference in the attenuation in Smith 's
  [3,4,23]   Regions A, B and D, while Smith 's Region C and
the Central Volcanic Region need more data before their attenuation
characteristics can be properly
established.    references        
4      The intensities of the 1976 Korakonui earthquake
do not appear to have been anomalously high as reported at the time.    
5      The attenuation of intensity in New Zealand was
found to be very similar to that of Turkey, the two regions being
dominated by strike-slip faulting.    
6      The attenuation expressions found in this study
may be inverted to estimate the magnitude of early earthquakes for
which instrumental magnitudes are unavailable.   Estimates made
in this way gave M &approx; 7.9 for the 1848
Marlborough earthquake and M &approx; 8.4 for the
1855 Wairarapa earthquake.   These estimates involve some
extrapolation from the data base, but are markedly larger than
previous estimates made in the same way.          
  

        ASSESSMENT OF SEISMIC HAZARD IN THE
WELLINGTON REGION, NEW ZEALAND    
  W J HASTIE and R J VAN DISSEN  *  
  Wellington Regional Council, Wellington, New Zealand
    *  DSIR Geology &amp; Geophysics, Lower Hutt, New
Zealand
    SUMMARY  
    The Wellington Regional Council and the New Zealand
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) have
jointly developed a multi-tiered approach for seismic hazard
assessment in the Wellington region.   The key components of
this investigation include an assessment of the fault
rupture, ground shaking, tsunami, liquefaction and lateral
spreading, landslip, and locally significant hazards within
the region.   Results to date from the tsunami and ground
shaking hazard assessment are presented.  
    This prescription for seismic hazard assessment,
though developed for the Wellington region, is applicable
to other areas throughout New Zealand, both on a regional and
site-specific scale.    
    INTRODUCTION  
    In a global tectonic context, New Zealand sits astride
the obliquely-convergent boundary between the Pacific and
Australian plates.   As a consequence, the country is cut
and deformed by many active faults and folds
  reference[12]  , and is not infrequently shaken by
moderate to large earthquakes   reference[15]  .
  Seismic hazards thus potentially pose a serious threat to
many districts throughout New Zealand.   The first step in
reducing the vulnerability    1     of the
community to this hazard is an assessment of the hazard
itself.    1   Following the terminology of
Crozier   reference[5]  ,   risk   is the
product of   natural hazard   and
  vulnerability.     Risk can be reduced either by
modifying the hazard event or by reducing the level of
vulnerability.     There are three essential
components for such an assessment   reference[10]  :
1) Likelihood of occurrence of an event that will cause
casualties, damage, or disruption&semi;
2) Location of effects on the ground&semi;
3) Estimated severity of the effects on the ground,
structures, or equipment.  
    In the lower part of the North Island, New Zealand,
regional planning functions are administered by the Wellington
Regional Council (Fig. 1).   The Council encompasses 8130
km  2   and a population of 400 000, of which 328 000
live in the Wellington, Hutt Valley, and Porirua areas.   An
important function of the Council is the identification and
reduction of the vulnerability of the community to natural
hazards, including seismic hazards.   As a means of carrying
out this function, the Council is preparing a Natural Disaster
Reduction Plan.   The plan aims to reduce the risk from
hazard events (earthquake, landslip, flooding, coastal
erosion) through a variety of measures including planning and
resource management, structural and operational activities,
public education and awareness, warning, and post disaster
response and recovery.  
    This paper outlines the approach taken by the
Wellington Regional Council and DSIR for the assessment of
seismic hazards in the Wellington region, and presents results
to date from the tsunami and ground shaking hazard
assessment.  
  Figure 1.  
  caption  
    SEISMIC HAZARD ASSESSMENT IN THE WELLINGTON REGION  
    Wellington Regional Council 's work on the seismic
hazard and vulnerability assessment commenced in 1988, and the
plan is due for completion in 1995.   The work has been
broken down into several components including fault rupture
and regional deformation, ground shaking, tsunami,
liquefaction and lateral spreading, landslip, and locally
significant hazards (Fig. 2).   Each hazard has a differing
effect and differing requirements for vulnerability reduction,
usually available through land use control (zoning), building
codes, and/or retrofit strengthening.   The assessments
are progressing for specific geographic sections of the
region, with a concentration on the more populated urban areas
where the risk is greatest.  
  Figure 2.  
  caption  
    Tsunami Hazard  
    The tsunami hazard to Wellington Harbour and
surrounding land is thought to be greatest for locally
generated events   reference[7]  .   This is supported
by historical observations.   Between 1849-1989, a total of
eight distant and local tsunami events have been experienced
in Wellington&semi; most of these have been non-damaging.   The
largest tsunami occurred in 1855 when a magnitude 8
earthquake on the Wairarapa fault caused seafloor displacement
within Cook Strait.   Large waves, 3.7 m in height, were
seen to enter Wellington Harbour, causing flooding of shops in
one of the main commercial areas of Wellington City.  
    Numerical models were used to estimate the size of
potential tsunamis generated in southern Cook Strait and
Wellington Harbour   reference[7]  .   The primary input
to the tsunami models came from dislocation models of the type
of earthquakes that are expected to cause deformation of the
seabed, and hence have the potential to generate a
tsunami.   The four earthquake scenarios
    modeled    modelled     were offshore rupture
of the Wairau, Ohariu, Wellington, and Wairarapa faults (Fig.
1).  
    Results from the modelling indicate that only one of
the events is likely to produce a damaging tsunami.   This
would be a repeat of the 1855 Wairarapa earthquake.   One
interesting finding was that in many cases the onset of wave
motion within Wellington Harbour occurs about 20 minutes after
the earthquake, with the maximum water elevations
occurring up to 2.5 hours after the earthquake.  
    The total area of land identified as susceptible to
tsunami is about 600 hectares (ha) (Fig. 3).   The major
land uses within this area are residential (132 ha),
recreation (107 ha), industrial (90 ha),
transport/communication (75 ha), commercial (74 ha), and
coastal margin (70 ha).   The areas most susceptible to
inundation are Lyall Bay, Evans Bay, Lambton Harbour, and the
Hutt River mouth (Fig. 3).   Many important commercial and
industrial centres are potentially at risk, with basements of
buildings being particularly prone to damage.  
  Figure 3.  
  caption  
    Ground Shaking Hazard  
    During damaging earthquakes impacting on the
Wellington region it is expected that there will be
significant spatial variations in the degree of earthquake
ground shaking.   Such variations have occurred in recent
large earthquakes affecting Mexico City, Leninakan, and the
San Francisco Bay Area, and are often correlated with local
geological ground conditions   reference[4,14,24]  .  
    A number of techniques have been employed to identify
and define the ground shaking hazard in the Wellington region.
  These include geological mapping
  reference[6,8,13,19]  , cone- and seismic-cone
penetrometer probing   reference[1,18,19]  , analysis of
strong motion earthquake records   reference[11,16,17]  ,
analysis of microearthquake recordings
  reference[20-23]  , numerical modelling
  reference[19]  , and surveys of earthquake damage and
felt intensities   reference[8,9]  .   It is
considered that no single technique can provide all the
answers, and that a higher degree of confidence in the results
can be achieved by using a variety of methods.  
    The 1974 DSIR microzoning study of Wellington city
identified three "hazard" zones (Fig. 4), based largely on
geological considerations, and spacial variations in damage
caused by a distant M 7 earthquake, and a local M 5.5
earthquake   reference[8]  .   The zones and their
expected response during seismic shaking are
summarised below:
  Zone1:    Basement rock less than 10 m from the
ground surface, except for the crush zone of the Wellington
fault.   No amplification of earthquake
motions.    
  Zone2:    Compact sediment, including weathered
gravels, fault crush zone, and completely weathered bedrock.
  Small amplification of earthquake
motions.    
  Zone3:    High porosity sediments (harbour
sediments).   Significant amplification of incident
earthquake motions.      
    At the time of the 1974 study, no strong motion
earthquake records were available.   Recently, strong motion
records from the two strongest earthquakes experienced in
central Wellington during the past two decades were analyzed
to determine the character of ground motion recorded on
various geological ground conditions   reference[17]  ,
and to test the validity of the 1974 microzonation.
  The findings of this study support the earlier zonation.
  Ratios of the 5% damped response spectra for individual
sites within Zone 3, compared to the average bedrock spectrum
(Zone 1), have amplifications of up to 
  Figure 4.   
  caption  
6 in the period band of 0.25-1 seconds.   The dominant
period of response for Zone 1 sites is at 0.1-0.25
seconds.  
    The focus of the 1990/91 DSIR work for the Wellington
Regional Council was the identification and quantification of
the earthquake ground shaking hazard in the Lower Hutt and
Porirua areas.   Four ground shaking hazard zones are
identified in the Lower Hutt area, and three in Porirua
  reference[25]   (Figs. 5 &amp; 6).   These hazard zones
are defined using geological, microseismic, and strong motion
inputs, and are graded from 1 to 5 based on their expected
response during an earthquake.   In general, areas within
Zone 5 are expected to experience the greatest amount of
shaking during an earthquake event, whereas areas within Zone
1 are expected to experience the least amount of shaking.
Descriptions of the geological materials that typify each
hazard zone are summarized below.  
  Zone 1:    Greywacke bedrock, including areas
overlain by less than 10 m of deeply weathered gravel and
loess, or well engineered fill.    
  Zone 2:    Alluvial gravel and fan alluvium&semi; fine
to coarse gravel, up to 200 m thick, with some beds and lenses
of finer grained sediment (sand, silt, clay, and peat) usually
less than 5 m thick.   The coarse sediments typically have
SPT values of N &gteq; 20.
  Also included is this zone are the
5-10 m thick windblown sands, and 10-20 m thick extremely weak
silty sandstones at Titahi Bay.    
  Zone 3-4:    Up to 15 m of fine grained sediment
(fine sand, silt, clay, and peat) within the top 20 m or so of
alluvial gravel, underlain by up to 250 m of alluvial gravel
and finer grained sediment.   The near-surface fine grained
sediments typically have SPT values of
N &lteq; 10-20, whereas the coarser consolidated
sediments generally have SPT values N &gteq; 20.    
  Zone 5:    Soft sediment (fine sand, silt, clay,
and peat), up to 10-40 m thick, at or very near the surface,
underlain by bedrock or a variable thickness of gravel and
other finer grained sediment.   SPT values for these soft
sediments are generally N &lteq; 10-20, and their shear wave
velocities at Lower Hutt, Wainuiomata, and Porirua are in the
order of 175 m/s, 90-150 m/s, and 110 m/s respectively
  reference[1,18,19]  .    
    Zone 5 areas in Porirua total approximately 460 ha,
including 50 ha commercial and 66 ha residential use, and are
characterized by a 10-20 m thickness of fine-grained
marine sediment underlain by bedrock or less than 10-30 m of
gravel.   The Zone 5 area in the southwestern part of Lower
Hutt totals 1142 ha (including 63 ha commercial, 87 ha
industrial, 661 ha residential), and corresponds to a
10-30 m thickness of fine-grained marine sediment underlain by
200-300 m of gravel and finer grained sediment.   Zone 5
areas in Wainuiomata correspond to a 10-40 m thickness of
fine-grained swamp and lacustrine sediment underlain by
bedrock or less than 30 m of gravel.  
    The Wellington Regional Council 's "Quakeline" survey
of the October 1990 Cape Palliser earthquakes resulted in over
700 felt intensity observations.   Felt Modified Mercalli
(MM) intensities in the Wellington region varied from MM I to
MM V.   There was a general rise in the average reported MM
intensity from Zone 1 to Zone 5.   The greatest number of MM
I reports occurred in Zone 1 areas, whereas the greatest
number of MM V reports came from Zone 5 areas
  reference[9]  .
  Figure 5.  
  caption  
  Figure 6.  
  caption    
    At the beginning of the seismic hazard study, it was
recognised that no single earthquake or zone of earthquake
sources adequately describes the range of ground shaking
hazard facing the region.   A large local event will
certainly be devastating, yet significant localized damage is
also expected from large, more frequent, distant earthquakes.
  The shaking response of each of the above zones is thus
assessed for two distinct earthquake scenarios.   Scenario 1
is for a large, distant, shallow (&lt;60 km)
earthquake that produces MM V-VI shaking intensities in
bedrock over the Wellington region.   An example of such an
event would be a M 7 earthquake centred about 100 km from the
study area.   In comparison with the 1989 Loma Prieta
earthquake, this scenario implies little damage to
structures founded on the best sites, yet significant damage
to certain structures on the worst.   Scenario 2 is for a
large earthquake centred on the proposed Wellington-Hutt
Valley segment of the Wellington fault that extends through
Wellington city and the Hutt Valley.   Rupture of this
segment has a mean recurrence interval of about 600 years, and
is expected to be associated with a c. M 7.5 earthquake at a
depth of less than 30 km.   Up to 5 m of right-lateral and 1
m of vertical displacement at the ground surface is expected
in this event   reference[2,26]  .  
    The expected shaking response of each hazard zone in
the Lower Hutt and Porirua areas is expressed as a suite of
ground motion parameters, comprising: expected MM intensity&semi;
peak horizontal ground acceleration&semi; duration of strong
shaking&semi; amplification of ground motion with respect to
bedrock, expressed as a Fourier spectral ratio (Fsr),
including the frequency range over which the greatest
amplification occurs&semi; and amplification of the 5% damped
acceleration response spectra relative to the peak at a
reference bedrock site (Table 1).   Van Dissen
  reference[25]  , and supporting DSIR reports
  reference[6,13,16,18,19,20,22]  , provide the
justification for the values listed in Table 1.  
    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  
    As results from the hazard assessment become available
they are placed on the Council 's geographic information
system.   This enables the hazard information to be overlain
with human occupation factors such as land use, population,
and building type to determine the risk to the community from
the hazard.   At the same time, investigations are underway
to develop risk reduction measures based on the Council 's role
in resource management and planning, advocating, advising,
researching and responding to seismic hazards.   Because
  implementation is the key to successful risk
reduction   the measures proposed for the Natural
Disaster Reduction Plan must balance the level of known risk
with the degree of mitigation they will achieve, the
feasibility of their implementation, their acceptability by
the community, and their cost.  
    Wellington Regional Council 's seismic hazard
assessment programme using DSIR as specialist technical
consultants has proved to be successful in identifying seismic
hazards within the region.   Work has been completed on
fault rupture   reference[3]  , tsunami, and ground
shaking hazards for parts of the region&semi; additional work is
planned to complete the hazard assessment by 1994.   The
hazard information and risk reduction measures will be
included in the Natural Disaster Reduction Plan due to be
completed in 1995.    
  

        INTRODUCTION    
    The orchid here named   Thelymitra tholiformis   has
had a confusing taxonomic history that is best explained by
reviewing past treatments of the associated taxa, namely,
  T. intermedia   Berggren and   T. aemula   Cheeseman,
in chronological sequence.  
    The name   T. intermedia   is based on plants
collected by Berggren in October 1874 from dry places in the Bay of
Islands in northern New Zealand.   Berggren found these plants
growing in association with   T. longifolia   Forster et G.
Forster and   T. ixioides   Sw.   His diagnosis reads:
    "T. caule strictiusculo, floribus roseis,
columnae apice trilobae lobo intermedio truncato-bifido margine
integerrimo lobulis acutis incurvatis, lobis lateralibus longe
porrectis apice penicillatis, antherae apiculo
exserto"     (Berggren 1878, p. 21).   In his
description Berggren comments on the similarity of   T.
intermedia  , with only four small flowers, to slender forms of
  T. longifolia   but with a column intermediate between that
species and   T. ixioides  , lacking the cucullate column of
the former and the spotted perianth and fimbriate or dentate
intermediate lobe of the latter.   As Moore later pointed out
(Moore &amp; Edgar 1970, p. 129), Berggren 's figures of the side and
front views of the column of his species (t.5, f.22,24) are highly
stylised, and therefore of limited diagnostic use.    
    In later accepting   T. intermedia   Cheeseman (1906,
1925) relied almost entirely on the original description, but
suggested that Berggren 's species may have been the same as   T.
pauciflora   R. Br., and this question could only be settled by
actual comparison of the types (Cheeseman 1906, p. 670).  
    In 1919 Cheeseman described   T. aemula   based on
material collected from   Leptospermum   scrub at Birkdale,
near Auckland, by H. B. Matthews (Cheeseman 1919, p. 94).
  Cheeseman 's diagnosis states:       "Species ad
  T. ixioides   proxime accedit, sed differt columnae lobis
lateralibus multo elongatis, et lobo mediano non
cristato."        
    Cheeseman defined   T. aemula   as a stout or slender
orchid with narrow-linear, thick, channelled leaves, and blue
flowers with a five-lobed column wing.   He further remarked:
    "It is doubtless very closely allied to   T.
ixioides   and the Australian   T. canaliculata  , but
appears to constantly differ in the lateral lobes of the column
being much longer, flattened, and more copiously penicillate&semi; and
the middle lobe, although denticulate at the top, is not at all
warted and crested at the back.   The flowers appear to be
invariably blue&semi; but the column is surrounded by a narrow band of
violet just below the lobes, above which the colour is bright
yellow"   (Cheeseman 1919, 1925)  .   No illustration was
provided.  
    Much later Hatch revised the New Zealand forms of
  Thelymitra   and, among other decisions, made the new
combination   T. longifolia   var.   intermedia  
(Berggren) Hatch (Hatch 1952, p. 397).   In so doing he adhered
largely to Berggren 's description and stressed the thin tufts of
white cilia (pl. 80, J), noting that   "Berggren 's
  intermedia   is so frequently mistaken for
  longifolia   that it seems better to include it as a
variety."    
    Hatch (1952, p. 393) also accepted Cheeseman 's   T.
aemula  , adding to the original description and selecting as
the lectotype AK 3364, Birkdale, 11. 1920,   H. B.
Matthews  , in the Auckland Institute and Museum Herbarium.  
    In preparation for the second volume of the "Flora of New
Zealand", Moore (1969) formally described several new orchid taxa
and discussed some associated species.   She regarded plants of
  T. intermedia   as   "having white cilia and a column
margin which inclines forward and is often jagged and inrolled
without being truly hooded"  &semi; a description that matches
some of the column features of   T. tholiformis   described
below.   Moore also reviewed the status of   T. aemula   at
length, pointing out that the figures labelled   T. aemula  
by Hatch (1952, pl. 78, J-M) represent different columns in which
the wing is not five-lobed.   These figures, based on drawings by
J. B. Irwin of specimens from the Waitakere Range, Auckland, in
fact represent the species here described as   T.
tholiformis  .   On the other hand, Hatch 's diagrammatic
sketch of a   Thelymitra   column (Hatch 1952, Pl. 81, H),
also labelled   T. aemula  , shows three of the five column
lobes and could be interpreted as   T. aemula   or, equally,
  T. ixioides  .   The sketch is not sufficient to make a
satisfactory determination either way.   Moore (1969, p. 480)
also emphasised that the lectotype chosen by Hatch (1952) for
  T. aemula   (AK 3364) was, like all the specimens now in
the Auckland Institute and Museum Herbarium 's T. F. Cheeseman
collection, collected after the species name had been published (14
May 1919) and therefore was not acceptable.   However, she did
not regard   T. aemula   as a distinct species and suggested
that the best course to take, on the information then available,
was to include plants with unspotted flowers, previously assigned
to   T. aemula  , under the older name   T.
ixioides  .  
    In Volume 2 of the "Flora of New Zealand" (Moore &amp; Edgar
1970), regarded as the modern reference point for New Zealand
orchids, Moore (p. 127) stated that   T. aemula  
  "seems likely to have been based on a form of   T.
ixioides   with unspotted fls."   and on p. 129 applied
the name   T. intermedia   to plants with flowers like those
illustrated in error under   T. aemula   by Hatch (1952, Pl.
75, J-M).   Her description of   T. intermedia  
encompasses many of the features exclusive to   T.
tholiformis   described below.  
    At this point plants now referred to   T.
tholiformis   had been included in   T. aemula   by Hatch
(1952), and in   T. intermedia   by Moore (1969) and Moore &amp;
Edgar (1970).   Neither treatment was correct and all three taxa
have been misunderstood by recent authors.  
      REINSTATED NAME    
        Thelymitra aemula     Cheeseman
  Trans. &amp; Proc. N.Z. Inst. 51  , 1919, 94.  
      Thelymitra aemula   is a distinctive orchid that
can be separated readily from other species of   Thelymitra  
by the characters furnished by Cheeseman (1919, P. 94) and
additional ones provided here.   It differs from New Zealand and
Australian plants of   T. ixioides   principally by its
robust growth habit&semi; thick, channelled, and ribbed leaf lacking the
basal retrorse glandular papillae of   T. ixioides  &semi;
prominent stem bracts with divergent tips&semi; uniformly unspotted
perianth (  T. ixioides   has both spotted and unspotted
forms)&semi; column structure (Fig. 1)&semi; consistent self-pollination
(Australian forms of   T. ixioides   are entomophilous&semi; New
Zealand forms are predominantly autogamous)&semi; and chromosome number
- in   T. aemula   2  n  =40 (CHR 461189), in   T.
ixioides   2  n  =28 (CHR 461190, N.Z., spotted form&semi; CHR
461192, Victoria, spotted form&semi; CHR 461191, Victoria, unspotted
form), (E. J. Beuzenberg and M. I. Dawson, pers. comm.).  
    Along with Cheeseman we regard   T. aemula   as a
distinct species and, in the absence of any unequivocal type
material, designate the following to serve as the nomenclatural
type:
  Neotype: CHR 289732, Glenfield, 14.11.1918,   H. B.
Matthews  , 547/3 in The Carse Herbarium, left-hand specimen
labelled a) (Fig. 2).   This collection of two plants is named
and annotated as   T. aemula   by H. B. Matthews, agrees well
with Cheeseman 's description, and was collected from the original
locality before the species name was published (14 May 1919).
  We cannot be certain that Cheeseman saw this collection when he
described   T. aemula  , but there is a strong expectation
that he did.   Matthews regularly sent Cheeseman collections of
orchids, especially those he regarded as new species.
  Cheeseman, in turn, acknowledged Matthews as the discoverer of
  T. aemula  , and at the time Matthews was collecting
representative specimens in the Birkdale-Glenfield area, both he
and Cheeseman lived in Remuera as near neighbours.   
  Fig. 1  
  Fig. 2  
    Distribution:   Thelymitra aemula   is presently
known to occur widely though locally from near Tauranga to North
Cape.   It is usually found in short, light, second-growth
vegetation on heavy clay soils formerly occupied by kauri
(  Agathis australis  (D. Don) Lindley in Loudon) and
associated forest species.   Roadsides, track margins, forest
edges, and gumland scrub with   Leptospermum scoparium  
Forster et G. Forster and   Kunzea ericoides   (A. Rich.) J.
Thompson are favoured habitats.   In places throughout its
range   T. aemula   coexists with   T. ixioides   which
has a much wider distribution in New Zealand, extending at least as
far south as Canterbury (CHR 212439), though somewhat sparingly.
  It is likely that   T. aemula   will be found in other
parts of the "kauri zone", if not further afield.  
    Despite its robust growth habit,   T. aemula   has
small root-stem tuberoids and is difficult to maintain in
cultivation.   This trait, along with its relative paucity in the
wild, suggests a strong reliance on continued mycorrhizal
infection, perhaps by a specific symbiont.   
  Fig. 3  
    Conservation status: The category "Local" (Given 1981)
seems an appropriate conservation rating for   T. aemula  ,
based on the present knowledge of its distribution and
abundance.  
      TYPIFICATION OF   T. INTERMEDIA      
        Thelymitra intermedia     Berggren
  Minneskr. Fysiogr. Sallsk. Lund Art. 8  , 1878, 21.  
    Lectotype (here designated): LD 2562,   S. Berggren
s.n.  ,   "Bay of Islands Ins. boreal Novae
Zelandiae"  , Oct 1874! (Fig. 3).   This is the only sheet
in LD representing Berggren 's species and is annotated by a curator
  "Orig.!"  .   However, there may have been more
specimens that were subsequently distributed by a curator, or by
Berggren himself.  
    The envelope attached to the sheet contains light pencil
sketches and notes by Berggren.   One sketch (Fig. 3, left) is
labelled "Thel. longifolia", the other "Ny art." (New species).
  There is a close similarity between the latter and Berggren 's
published figure showing the same side view of the column of
  T. 
  Fig. 4  
intermedia   (Berggren 1878, t. 5, f. 22).   Berggren 's notes
over "Th. intermedia" translate thus:     "unites in form
of columna characters of   Th. longifolia   and
  ixioides  , together with which it grows.   Differs from
  longifolia   by apex of col. not cucullate [?, literally
"kapuchon"-like] (though somewhat arched), deeply cleft, obliquely
truncate, appendices long straight, overtopping, hair-pencil
crista-like but penicillate (straight tuft at apex)"    .
  (Per Lassen pers. comm., with his comments in square brackets).
  In the same envelope is a small packet containing a dried
anther and column arm, labelled "Thelym. intermedia
  anthera   and   appendik  ".  
    Berggren 's type consists of a single flowering plant 3Ocm
tall with roots and two root-stem tuberoids attached&semi; the older one
(Fig. 3, lower left) supporting the flower stem.   Soil particles
still adhering to the roots and tuberoids contain a high percentage
of clean silica grains in a pale grey silty-clay matrix, consistent
with the strongly leached E horizon of a podzolised soil, probably
developed under kauri and associated species.   The specimen has
a pale, truncated basal sheath&semi; a solitary leaf&semi; a slender stem
with three, distant, clasping bracts&semi; and a small, slender
inflorescence with four, shortly-pedicellate flower buds (Fig. 3,
note linear scale).   At the time the specimen was collected, the
first bud had completed anthesis&semi; the one above this was about to
open&semi; and the next two were immature with the uppermost the least
developed.   This sequence is in keeping with the behaviour of an
autogamous orchid.  
    The type specimen is almost identical to that figured
by Berggren (1878, t. 5, f. 21) which was probably based on
fresh material.   However, whereas the leaf in Berggren 's figure
is sub-erect, clean, and normal-looking, that of the type
material is heavily infected with rust and markedly distorted.
  A small scraping of sori yielded teleutospores and
uredospores of   Uromyces thelymitrae   McAlpine (M. G.
Cromey, pers. comm.).   This rust is common throughout New
Zealand and recorded hosts include   thelymitra longifolia,
T. pauciflora, T. pulchella, Prasophyllum pumilum  
(Pennycook 1989), and   Thelymitra carnea  .   Because
of the rust infection it is difficult to construct a meaningful
description of the leaf, except to say that it is incomplete (11 cm
long), narrow, and keeled.  
    Although the specimen is 115 years old, the stem and
particularly the stem bracts have an unmistakable 
  Fig.5  
reddish tinge.   The upper part of the stem and the inflorescence
are much darker, but the original colours of the two advanced
flowers have faded completely.   The tips and outer ribs (veins)
of all bracts support minute, triangular papillae.  
    To determine the structure of the flowers the second bud
(Fig. 3, arrowed) was removed, at first softened in detergent and
water, and finally restored in NaOH.   After each treatment the
flower was examined, photographed, and sketched whilst submerged in
fresh water.   The chief features of the flower are as follows
(Fig. 4): Perianth 6 mm long, without stripes or spots&semi; sepals,
petals, and labellum similar, elliptic, subacute.   Column short,
erect&semi; column arms &plusmn; terete, suberect&semi; hair tufts or
cilia ?white, sparse, &plusmn; straight, projecting above
post-anther     lob e    lobe    &semi; post-anther lobe
barely overtopping anther apex, dark above the middle, deeply
cleft, margins smoothly inturned with two small inturned horns in
front.   Anther erect, apex sharply pointed&semi; pollinia in two
pairs with monad pollen&semi; stigma short, broad, &plusmn; concave,
bilobed above&semi; rostellum not seen.   As the specimen was
collected in October, and had begun to flower, it represents an
early flowering species.  
    To summarise, the essential features of Berggren 's type
material agree with his description.   These same features,
together with additional ones cited above, are all characters
described for   Thelymitra pauciflora   (cf. Fig. 4, 5), thus
confirming Cheeseman 's suspicion (Cheeseman 1906, p. 670) that the
two are conspecific.   Thus,   T. intermedia   becomes a
synonym of the earlier   T. pauciflora  .  
    This leaves the species mistakenly assigned to   T.
intermedia   by Moore (Moore &amp; Edgar 1970, p. 129) without a
name.   This species is described below as   T.
tholiformis  .  
        DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPECIES      
          Thelymitra tholiformis     Molloy et
Hatch sp. nov.    
            T. aemula  
subsimilis.   Lobus medius collimnae haud cucullatus,
tholiformis, vividi-flavus, margines supra denticulati.   Lobi
antici absentes.   Cilia loborum lateralium, alba densa
caespitosa.        
    Holotypus: CHR 461356, Dangens Road, nr. Oruru, Northland,
ridge crest roadcut at 152 m, margin of second growth
conifer/hardwood forest,   B. P. J. Molloy and D. P.
McCrae  , 31 October 1988 (Fig. 6).  
    Description: Plant at flowering up to 60 cm tall, usually
less.   Leaf solitary, up to 36 x 1.5 cm, linear-lanceolate,
sub-erect, shallow-concave with exterior ridges on mature plants,
usually green, often with  reddish margins and base.   Stem
slender to moderately robust, blue-green&semi; basal sheath up to 30 mm
long, pale, truncate, mucronate&semi; stem bracts usually 2, 20-90 x 3-6
mm, lanceolate, sheathing in basal half to two thirds, occasionally
with a third leaf-like bract at base up to 150 mm long.   Floral
bracts 10-20 X 3-6 mm, lanceolate.   Flowers 1-15, 10-15 mm
diameter, pale to strong mauve, on short pedicels.   Ovary
slender, oblanceolate, terete, 5-10 x 3-5 mm.   Perianth cupped,
parts ovate, apiculate, up to 12 x 5 mm&semi; sepals narrower than
petals&semi; petals minutely papillate externally.   Column up to 5 mm
tall, erect, concave in side view, pale purple with yellow striae 
  Fig. 6  
and a narrow purple band near the top.   Post-anther lobe as high
or exceeding the anther, tholiform, not cucullate, bright yellow,
margin irregularly denticulate.   Column arms &plusmn; terete,
horizontal or upturned, with short, dense, globose tufts of white
cilia.   Anther erect, apex usually pointed, sometimes curved
forward&semi; pollinia white, in two pairs, friable, with monad pollen.
  Stigma short, broad, &plusmn; concave, bilobed above&semi;
rostellum orbicular, very prominent (Fig. 1).   Capsule 10-15 x
5-7 mm, elliptic, green.  
      Distribution: Northern New Zealand&semi; from the Waita-
kere Range, Auckland, to North Cape.   Endemic.  
    Habitat: Gumland scrub and second growth conifer/ hardwood
forest on podzolised soils formed under kauri and associated
species.  
    Flowering: October to February&semi; seldom more than two or
three flowers open at the same time on any one plant.   Flowers
open tardily.  
    Pollination: Predominantly self-pollinating (auto-
gamous).  
    Chromosome number: 2  n  =66, CHR 461278, 461279 (E.
J. Beuzenberg and M. I. Dawson, pers. comm.).  

    Affinities: Previously confused with   T. aemula  ,
but a more slender species with a distinctive dome-shaped
post-anther lobe with a bright yellow, irregularly denticulate
margin.   Also differs from   T. aemula   in chromosome
number.  
    Conservation status: Widespread but very local&semi; the
category "Rare" (Given 1981) seems appropriate on the basis of
present knowledge.  
    Etymology: The epithet   tholiformis  , dome-shaped,
refers to the post-anther lobe.  
    Other specimens: CHR 461358, Taumatarea, Waitakere Range,
Auckland, bare gum clay, 91 m,   E. D. Hatch  , 8.11.1987&semi;
CHR 461357, Kaitarakihi Park, Waitakere Range, Auckland, bare gum
clay, 121 m,   E. D. Hatch  , 10.11.1987&semi; CHR 461359, Farley
Track, Huia, Waitakere Range, Auckland, bare gum clay, 213 m,
  E. D. Hatch  , 11.11.1987&semi; CHR 461360 A-B, Powerline Track,
Parau, Waitakere Range, Auckland, on gum clay, 152 m,   E. D.
Hatch  , 12.11.1987.      
  

          INTRODUCTION      
    Most pastures in New Zealand require fertiliser phosphorus
(P) to compensate for P losses during grazing and they also respond
to nitrogen (N) fertiliser especially in spring and autumn.
  Potassium fertiliser (K) is required to compensate for K losses
during grazing by dairy cattle on most soils and for sheep grazing
on soils such as gley podzols, yellow brown pumices and loams, and
some yellow-brown earths.  
    The contribution of these nutrients in excreta to the soil
nutrient pool and hence to pasture growth depends on the spatial
distribution of excreta, the rate of the nutrient returned, and the
recovery of that nutrient by the pasture.   Research on the
spatial distribution of excreta has been undertaken for cattle
(Peterson et al. 1956&semi; Richards &amp; Wolton 1976) and for sheep
(Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi; Donald &amp; Leslie 1969&semi; Thorrold et al. 1985).
  If the spatial distribution of excreta results in a significant
proportion of the pasture being affected then fertiliser
requirements may be reduced accordingly.  
    The reported trial investigated the spatial distribution of
sheep excreta from three practical aspects.
  1. The effect of stocking density on the spatial distribution
of excreta. 
  2. The effects of grazing method, i.e., comparing grazing
durations of four periods of 1 day compared with one period of 4
days.
  3. The carry-over effect of autumn-applied N on pasture yield
after the first grazing, resulting from the return of dung and
urine N.  
        MATERIALS AND METHODS      
        Site      
    The trial was sited on an Okarito gley podzol at Coal
Creek, 8 km east of Greymouth.   This soil type is poorly drained
because of impeded drainage and has been described by Mew (1980).
  The pasture, originally sown in 1982, consisted of 'Grasslands
Ruanui' ryegrass (  Lolium perenne   L.), 'Grasslands Huia'
white clover (  Trifolium repens   L.), Yorkshire fog
(  Holcus lanatus   L.), and Lotus major (  Lotus
pedunculatus   L.).  
    The site was spelled for 3 months to reduce the effect of
residual urine patches from previous grazings, and then mown in
late March 1985 to give an even pasture cover.   In the second
year of the trial (1986), the site was spelled from grazing for 2
months before the trial started.  
        Trial design      
    The 1 ha area was divided into five blocks each of 0.19 ha
providing a run-in area and four replicates.   Each of the four
replicates was divided into six 0.027 ha plots.   To fit into the
restricted site area, the first five plots in each replicate were
30 x 9 m and the last one was 27 x 10 m.   Along the end of the
four replicates, there was one larger plot of 0.108 ha.   The
  Table 1 Treatments randomly allocated to the six plots in each
replicate plus seventh treatment on larger plot.  
first three replicates were on flat ground and the fourth was on an
even slope.  
    The treatments randomly allocated to the six plots in each
replicate plus the seventh treatment situated on the larger plot
are shown in Table 1.   The stocking densities are rounded-off
for simpler expression.   A lower stocking density was used in
October 1985 and October 1986 because less pasture was available
for grazing.  
    Nitrogen was applied as urea to Treatments 2 and 6 on 1
April 1985 and 1986.   From earlier research where N was applied
in early April on the West Coast, Williams &amp; Paterson (1983) showed
that 25 kg N/ha resulted in a higher efficiency of N use than 50 kg
N/ha so the rate of application was reduced in the second year.
  The plots were separately fenced using temporary electric
fencing and grazed  by mixed-age Perendale ewes from 10 to 15 June
and 14 to 18 October 1985, and from 16 to 20 June and 13 to 17
October 1986.   After a 1-day grazing of the run-in area, the
sheep grazed each replicate of Treatments 1-6 for 1 day, whereas
for Treatment 7, the sheep spent 4 days in the larger plot.  
        Assessments      
    Pasture herbage mass was measured before N was applied
(Treatments 1, 2, 5, and 6) and before and after each grazing.
  A rising plate meter (Holmes 1974) was used to indirectly
measure pasture mass at 2O sites within each plot.   At the mean
reading and also at +/- 1.2 SD units of the mean reading, pasture
within a 2O x 2O cm quadrat was cut to ground-level, oven-dried for
24 h at 90&deg;C, and weighed.  
    After each 4-day grazing period, each plot was divided into
60 quadrats, 2 x 2 m squares, using string, and the number of newly
deposited discernible dung patches was counted in each square.
  At any one measurement date, the dung patches consisted of
either soft deposits of faeces which were easily identified as a
single dung patch, or as discretely formed hard pellets, often
scattered.   In the latter situation, all pellets with a 200
cm  2   area were arbitrarily counted as one dung patch.
  The area covered by 20 dung patches in Treatments 1, 2, and 6
in the fourth replicate was measured in June 1985 and the dung
chemically analysed.   The concentration of N was measured using
the semi micro-Kjeldahl digestion (Bremner 1965).   To measure P
concentration the dung was digested with nitric acid and perchloric
acid and the digest was analysed using the molybdenum blue method
(Blakemore et al. 1972).   K concentration was measured using the
same digestion as P followed by analysis using atomic absorption
spectrophotometry.   In October 1985 the area of 10 urine patches
was also measured.   The eight ewes in Treatment 1 were dosed on
three consecutive mornings with 10 ml each of a 1% sodium
fluorescin solution.   On the night of the fourth day urine
patches containing this chemical were identified using an
ultra-violet lamp operated off a generator.   The urine patches
were marked and the area measured   the   next day.  
        Statistical analysis      
        Distribution of quadrat counts      
    The collection of the spatial distribution data for a plot
(i.e., the exact position of each dung patch) was impractical and
so counts of dung patches in 2 x 2 m quadrats were taken.   The
counts from the quadrats are independent observations of the
spatial process which generated the resulting spatial distribution
of the dung patches over the plot.   The distribution of the
counts will reflect some attributes of the spatial process,
although the complete nature of the spatial process cannot be
deduced from the quadrat counts.   For example, many distinct
spatial processes are known to give rise to a negative binomial
distribution for the quadrat counts.   In particular the counts
will still contain complete information on the mean density of dung
deposition over the plot and will capture most of the information
on the degree of aggregation of dung patches in the plot.  
    The degree of aggregation of dung patches was an attribute
of particular interest in this trial.   Fig. 1 shows three
spatial distributions which show varying degrees of
aggregation.  
    Fig. 1(A) shows a spatial distribution that has been
generated by a regular spatial process which distributes objects
evenly over the plot.   Fig. 1(B) shows a spatial distribution
generated by a completely random spatial process (i.e., the
positioning of any object is independent of all other objects and
all positions have an equal probability of being chosen).   When
a spatial process is completely random, the quadrat counts will
follow a Poisson distribution.   Fig. 1(C) shows a spatial
distribution generated by a clustered or aggregated spatial
process.   The negative binomial has been traditionally used in
analyses where the objects to be counted are clumped or aggregated
together (Anscombe 1949&semi; Skellam 1952&semi; Bliss &amp; Fisher 1953&semi;
Peterson et al. 1956&semi; Bliss &amp; Owen 1958&semi; Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi;
Donald &amp; Leslie 1969&semi; McCaughran &amp; Arnold 1976).  
  Figure 1A, B, C  
    A variety of distributions were fitted to the counts of
dung patches in the 60 quadrats per plot by the method of maximum
likelihood using the statistical package, Maximum Likelihood
Program Version 3.07 (MLP).   The seven distributions which could
be fitted to this data using MLP were the Poisson, geometric, log
series, negative binomial, Neyman Type A, Polya-Aeppli, and Poisson
lognormal distributions.   The definition of these distributions
can be found in the MLP manual (Ross 1982).   The first three
distributions have only one defining parameter and are all special
uses of the negative binomial distribution.   The last four
distributions have two defining parameters and allow for varying
degrees of aggregation of the counted objects.  
    On fitting the seven distributions to the 112 (seven
treatments x four reps at four dates  ) sets of quadrat
counts, it was found that there was significant lack of fit at the
5% level in over 70% of the analyses for the single parameter
distributions, in 21% of the analyses for the Poisson lognormal
distribution, and in 13% of the analyses for the other three
distributions.   The three distributions, negative binomial,
Polya-Aeppli, and Neyman Type A, were equivalent in their ability
to fit the observed distributions, as measured by the Chi-square
goodness of fit test taken over all situations.   The negative
binomial distribution was chosen to represent the data since it is
the simplest of the three distributions and it is the distribution
that has been used in previous work on this topic (Peterson et al.
1956&semi; Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi; Donald &amp; Leslie 1969).  
        Negative binomial distribution      
    The negative binomial distribution can be expressed in a
variety of forms&semi; see, for example, Bliss &amp; Fisher (1953), Bliss &amp;
Owen (1958), and Johnson &amp; Kotz (1969).   The most convenient
form of expressing the probability distribution function of the
negative binomial is that proposed by Bliss &amp; Owen (1958) and used
by Barnwall &amp; Paul (1988), in which the random variable   X  
follows a negative binomial distribution with mean   m   and
dispersion parameter   c  , if
  formula (1)  
for   x   = 0,1,... &infinity;, 0 &lt;
  m   &lt; &infinity;, 0 &lt;
  c   &lt; &infinity; and where
&GAMMA;(  x  ) is the Gamma function.   The variance
of the distribution,   V  , is found from the formula:
  formula (2)  
and so   c   accounts for variance over and above
  m  , the variance of the Poisson distribution with mean
  m  .  
    The negative binomial distribution has the property that
the dispersion parameter   c   is invariant under random
thinning, i.e., if objects are removed at random from the area
being counted then the estimated value of   c   does not
change.   Thus maximum likelihood estimates of   m  
and   c   are independent and so this allows an independent
interpretation of these two parameters.  
    The mean,   m  , is a measure of the average number
of dung patches in a 4 m  2   area.   The parameter
  c   is known as the Poisson Index and is a measure of
aggregation or clumping of the dung patches.   The negative
binomial distribution has the property that its variance must be
greater than its mean.   As the variance tends towards the mean
(i.e.,   c   tends to zero), the negative binomial tends
towards the Poisson distribution and in the particular samples
where the mean exactly equalled the variance, the Poisson
distribution was fitted and so   c   = 0.   If the Poisson
Index is equal to 0 then the dung patches are randomly distributed&semi;
if it is positive then the dung patches tend to be aggregated
together, leaving some areas with high densities of dung patches
and other areas with very few dung patches (Bliss &amp; Fisher 1953).
  In those situations where the variance is less than the mean
the negative binomial can not be fitted.   Although the negative
binomial distribution is not defined for negative values of
  c  , the definition of the Poisson Index can be extended to
cover regular spatial distributions.   Where the variance of the
counts,   V  , is less than the mean of the counts, as for
regular distributions, the Poisson Index can be defined as:
  formula   which is Equation 2 rearranged to make   c  
the subject.   Thus for regular spatial distributions the
Poisson index will be negative.   For example, the
Poisson Indices for Fig. 1 A, B, C are -0.144, 0.012, and 0.564
respectively.  
    The problem of the variance being less than the mean only
occurred on the first sampling date (24 June 1985).   This was
caused by an under-estimation of the number of dung patches in
quadrats at the higher stocking densities.   After this fault was
realised the counting procedure was refined.   Hence the first
sampling date has been excluded from the subsequent analyses.
  Also the treatment which involved 1800 sheep/ha per day for 4
days did not have any true replication on a particular date as the
animals were all run on one large area rather than four independent
areas.   Therefore this treatment was left out of the analysis of
variance of the mean and Poisson Index and was analysed separately
using the variation between dates for an estimate of error.   The
fitted parameter estimates of   m   and   c   were
analysed using analysis of variance.   In the analysis of
variance, the sampling date x replicate combinations were fitted as
blocks.   There was one missing value in each of the analyses as
a result of the sheep escaping from the Treatment 5 plot in June
1986.    
        RESULTS      
        Spatial distribution of dung patches      
    At the first measurement (24 June 1985) of the number of
dung patches per quadrat (4 m  2  ) it was obvious that there
was an under-estimation at the higher stocking densities because of
the poor correlation between number of dung patches and sheep
(  r    2   = 0.22).   The counting method was
refined by reducing the arbitrary area covered by a dung patch
consisting of discrete pellets and a higher correlation was gained
at the June 1986 sampling (  r    2   0.50).   Since
stocking density and hence sheep numbers per plot were lower at the
October sampling, it was easier to distinguish individual dung
patches and the correlation between number of dung patches and
sheep was higher in both 1985 (  r    2   = 0.96) and
1986 (  r    2   = 0.88).  
  Table 2 Mean number of dung patches/4 m  2   in each
plot  
    The mean number of dung patches per quadrat increased with
stocking density (Table 2).   Over the three measurement dates,
there were significant differences (  P   &lt; 0.05) between the
four stocking densities.   There was no significant difference
between N and no N treatments at the lowest and highest stocking
densities or grazing duration at the highest stocking density.
  There were more dung patches counted in October 1986 than in
October 1985, which could be caused by variation in sheep behaviour
or variation in the counting technique.  
    The Poisson Index tended to decrease as stocking density
increased (Table 3).   At the lowest stocking density with N the
mean Poisson Index was significantly higher (  P   &lt; 0.05) than
at all other stocking densities.   The Poisson Index for the
lowest stocking density without N was also significantly higher
(  P   &lt; 0.05) than that for the highest stocking density, both
with and without N.   For each plot, counts from individual
quadrats     where    were     compared at different
grazings.   There was a poor correlation between grazings (Table
4) indicating that the animals were not depositing dung in the same
quadrats, i.e., the same part of the plot, at different grazings.
  The highest correlations were measured between the October 1985
and June 1986 grazings and here the correlation coefficient tended
to increase with stocking density but was low for the 4-day grazing
duration.  
        Pasture yield      
    There was a significant (  P   &lt; 0.05) pasture yield
response to April-applied urea measured before the first grazing in
1985 but not in 1986 (Table 5).   Pre-grazing pasture mass in
October declined with increasing stocking density in both years but
the only significant differences were between the lowest and
highest stocking densities (Table 6).   There was a significant
difference (  P   &lt; 0.05) in pre-grazing pasture mass between
N and no N at the two extreme stocking densities in October 1985.
  Pre-grazing pasture mass in October 1986 was much lower than in
October 1985 because winter and early spring growth rates were
reduced by lower temperatures.  
        Dung and urine characteristics      
    The number of defecations per sheep per day was estimated
as 26 (SE = 3.8) when the number of dung patches counted in each
plot at the October samplings was divided by the number of sheep
grazing each plot.   The average area of an individual dung patch
measured in June 1985 was 0.025 m  2   (SE = 0.01).
  Individual average urine patch area was measured as 0.03
m  2   (SE = 0.01) on 21 October 1985, after grazing on the
9OO sheep/ha per day plus N treatment.   The mean concentration
of nutrients in dung from the lowest stocking density was 0.55% K
(SE = 0.26), 0.67% P (SE = 0.21), and 2.2% N (SE =
0.8).  
        DISCUSSION      
    The results from this trial are further evidence that the
spatial distribution of sheep dung is best described by a negative
binomial distribution function as found by Tallis &amp; Donald (1964)
and Donald &amp; Leslie (1969).   The decrease in Poisson Index,
which is a measure of aggregation of dung patches, as stocking
density increased has also been reported by Donald &amp; Leslie (1969)
for sheep and Peterson et al. (1956) and Richards &amp; Wolton (1976)
for cattle.   Donald &amp;
  Table 3 Poisson Index,   c  , for distribution of dung
patches counts  
Leslie (1969) measured Poisson Indices of 0.56 and 0.69 from a
single grazing at 60 and 80 sheep/ha per day respectively.   At
a low stocking density of 58 cattle/ha per day, Peterson et al.
(1956) measured a Poisson Index of 0.57 whereas Richards &amp; Wolton
(1976) measured Poisson Indices of 0.10 and 0.20 at higher stocking
densities of 600 and 380 cattle/ha per day respectively.   The
range of the Poisson Index measured in this trial agrees with the
other reported values.   Thorrold et al. (1985) also reported
that dung distribution was less aggregated at higher stocking
rates.  
    In practical terms, the reported results indicate that at
winter stocking densities below 1200 sheep/ha per day and spring
stocking densities below 400 sheep/ha per day, dung tends to be
aggregated into a small proportion of the grazing area compared to
stocking densities above these levels.   The greater aggregation
of dung patches at the higher stocking density with a grazing
duration of 4 days compared to 1 day suggests that a 1-day shift
when block grazing with sheep during winter results in a more
uniform distribution of dung and hence a more efficient cycling of
plant nutrients in the dung.   Although shifting stock at longer
intervals has no deleterious effect on performance and requires
lower labour input, it results in a potential loss of plant
nutrients.   In the hill country environment, Gillingham (1982)
found no discernable effect on dung distribution when varying the
duration of grazing from 3 to 15 days and Thorrold et al. (1985)
gained a similar result after grazing for 7 and 21 days.   Other
factors such as aspect and slope tend to have an overriding effect
in the hill country situation.  
    The trend for the dung to be more consistently deposited in
the same quadrats by successive grazings at the higher stocking
densities, as found with the October and June grazings, could be
expected, since a larger proportion of the pasture is affected at
higher stocking densities and consequently, the likelihood of the
same quadrat being affected would be greater.   Donald &amp; Leslie
(1969) also found that there was a higher correlation in dung
distribution between grazings at higher stocking densities and
attributed this to the tendency of sheep to use the same portion of
a field for resting and rumination where heavy concentrations of
faeces are deposited.   However, this trend was not observed when
other grazings were compared, despite the shorter time span between
one other pair of grazings.   A possible explanation for the
lower correlation at the 4-day grazing compared to 1-day grazing
was the greater opportunity for the sheep to excrete over a larger
area.   Despite the lower pre-grazing herbage mass in October
1986 compared to October 1985, the number of dung patches in each
quadrat was lower, indicating that there is no relationship between
pasture mass and number of excretions.  
    Although there is little information in the literature on
the frequency of sheep urination and defecation and the area
affected, it is interesting to compare the measured results with
other reported values that do exist.   It was not possible to
measure the frequency of sheep urination in the reported trial and
the only value available in the literature is 20 urinations
  Table 4 Correlation coefficients for distribution of dung
patches between grazings  
per day (Doak 1952) derived from dividing the total daily volume of
urine by the volume of an individual urination.   The 26
defecations per day derived by dividing the total number of
defecations per area by the number of sheep present is higher than
the value of 19 defecations per day (Morton 1984) derived from
dividing the average daily weight of faeces by the mean weight of
one defecation.   Both values are much higher than the 6-8
defecations per sheep per day reported by Frame (1971) using an
unstated technique.   The accuracy of the two measurement
techniques used depends on the definition of a dung patch
especially when it is composed of scattered pellets.   This
variation in the area of an individual dung patch is illustrated by
the disparity between values of 0.0075 m  2   (Frame 1971),
0.012 m  2   (Morton 1984), and 0.025 m  2   in this
paper, all derived assuming the area is oblong and measuring the
two sides.   Both the latter measurements were on a mixture of
wet deposits and discrete pellets of dung so an average value
between these may be the best estimation.   In contrast there is
complete agreement between the measured value of 0.03 m  2  
per individual urine patch and that reported by Doak (1952).
  The same worker used the enhanced growth of grass and deep
green colour, which are features of the urine patch a few weeks
after voiding, to measure the area within which stimulation of
growth occurred and found an average value of 0.064 m  2  .
  Since the reported trial was sited on a pakihi soil with
impeded vertical drainage where most water movement is lateral
surface runoff, it could be assumed that the actual area eventually
affected by urine K and also N was at least similar to the area
measured by Doak (1952).   The P concentration of dung measured
here is similar to the reported value of 0.5% P (Bromfield 1961)
but lower than the value of 1.4% (Herriot &amp; Wells 1963).   These
workers also found higher values for dung N (3.2%) and K (1.3%)
than measured in this trial.  
    There is no reported research on the duration of sheep dung
N, P, and K effects and urine K and N effects and it can only be
assumed that they are similar to cattle dung and urine (Norman &amp;
Green 1958&semi; During &amp; McNaught 1961&semi; During et al. 1973&semi; During &amp;
Weeda 1973), i.e., 3 months for urine N, 1 year for urine K, and 2
years for dung N and P.   Recent research (Williams 1988)
suggests that the duration of the urine K effect is 1 year rather
than 2 years.  
    Using these parameters and assumptions, the proportion of
pasture affected by dung N and P can be estimated as follows.   A
paddock of area   A   is divided into quadrats of area equal
to that of a single dung patch,   a  .   From the stocking
rate and number of grazing days, the number of sheep grazing days
is calculated and then multiplied by the average number of
defecations per day per sheep to give the total number of dung
patches in the paddock,   n  .   The mean number of dung
patches expected in each quadrat,   D  , is then
  na/A  .   Using the estimated value of the Poisson Index,
  c  , the proportion of pasture surface covered by at least
one excreta patch,   P  , can be found using Equation 1, to
be:
  formula (4)  
  Table 6 Pre-grazing pature mass (kg DM/ha) before spring
grazing (October)  
  For small values of   D   (  D   &lt;&lt;
1)   P   &approx;   D  
because there is a very small probability of dung patches
overlapping but as   D   increases there are more quadrats
with overlapping dung patches and   P   &lt;
  D  .   Also   P   decreases as c increases, because
of a higher aggregation of dung patches.  
    The following calculations assume one winter grazing
similar to June 1985 and seven other grazings similar to October
1985 and 1986 per year.   Parameters used include measured values
of c for the treatments without N, 26 defecations per day, 0.025
m  2   affected by each defecation, a 2-year duration of
effect for dung N and P, a 1-year duration for urine K, and a
3-month duration for urine N.   At the highest stocking density,
52% of the pasture was affected by the N and P in at least one dung
patch whereas at the lowest stocking density, 31% of the pasture
was affected.   Using a measured value of 315 g faeces DM
excreted per sheep per day grazing ryegrass/white clover pasture
(Morton 1984) and the P concentration in dung measured in this
trial, a total of 12.7 kg P/ha is applied in dung at the highest
stocking density and 6.3 kg P/ha at the lowest stocking density.
  At the high stocking density therefore, dung P makes a
significant contribution to the soil P pool.   Since the N
concentration measured in dung was 3 times the P concentration, the
rate of N applied in dung could be estimated as 36 kg/ha at the
highest stocking density and 18 kg/ha at the lowest stocking
density.   Morton (1984) found that 72% of the N and P in sheep
dung were in the organic form so the N and P from the dung would
become available to pasture depending on the rate of
mineralisation,     and could only be regarded as slowly
available.   Dung K would affect 30% of the pasture at the
highest stocking density and 17% at the lowest stocking density
resulting in a return of 10.4 kg K/ha at the highest stocking
density and 5.2 kg K/ha at the lowest stocking density.  
    Assuming that the lack of difference between the pattern of
dung and urine distribution for cattle is similar for sheep (as
observed by Peterson et al. (1956)) then the same calculations can
be carried out for urine K and N effects.   These calculations
show that at the highest stocking density, 49% of the pasture was
affected by urine K whereas at the lowest stocking density, 28% of
the pasture was affected.   If the assumptions for duration of
effect and area affected are correct then these high proportions
affected by urine K could have an effect on fertiliser K
requirements.   If it is assumed that 170 kg K/ha is applied in
the urine patch (Herriott &amp; Crooks 1971), and there is a recovery
of 23% (During &amp; McNaught 1961) by pasture then 39 kg K/ha is
available to the pasture.   In a trial carried out on an Addison
gley podzol (Morton 1981), cycling of urine K was recognised as one
of the major factors involved in lower fertiliser K requirements
(25 kg/ha) under grazing compared to cutting.  
    Previous research suggests that the duration of effect for
urine N is only 3 months.   For urine N, 15% of the pasture will
be affected at the highest stocking density and 7% at the lowest
stock density.  
    These low estimated values for urine N reveal the reason
why there was a small carry-over effect of the autumn-applied urea
after the first grazing (Table 6).   An increase in pasture cover
in October was gained by grazing more laxly at 900 sheep/ha per
day in June but this would only be a practical proposition at low
stocking rates of less than 8 sheep/ha.   The initial pasture
yield response to April-applied urea (Table 5) was similar to that
gained in other West Coast trials (Williams &amp; Paterson 1983&semi; Morton
unpubl. data).   The lower increase in pasture yield caused by N
in 1986 was due to the urea being applied to a high pasture mass
(1740 kg DM/ha) and poor climatic conditions for pasture growth
thereafter.  
    The sodium fluorescin technique used allowed the boundaries
of individual urine patches to be easily identified at the lowest
stocking density provided at least three doses were administered to
the grazing animals.   In 1986, the technique was tried with only
one dosing but it was impossible to delineate the separate urine
patches.    
  

          MATERIALS AND METHODS      
    Cocoons of   K. isopodicola   were carefully
removed from rocks at Seal Reef, Kaikoura, New Zealand.
  Encapsulated larvae dissected from a cocoon were immediately
placed in 4% glutaraldehyde in 0.025M phosphate buffer.
  Following immersion for 6 h in the fixative at room
temperature, the material was washed in phosphate buffer (three
changes), then post-fixed in 2% osmium tetroxide in phosphate
buffer for 5 h at room temperature.   Specimens were dehydrated
in acetone and embedded in Spurr 's epoxy resin.   Sections were
cut on an LKB Ultrotome.   Some were stained with uranyl nitrate
for 30 min, counterstained with lead citrate for 5 min, and
photographed with a Hitachi HS-7 electron microscope&semi; others were
stained with uranyl nitrate for 1 h, then with lead citrate for 20
min, and photographed using a JEM-1200 EX electron microscope at 80
kV.   Almost all sections of six encapsulated larvae, and
separate sections of several other individuals, were examined.  
    For light microscopy, entire cocoons and their contents
were fixed in Bouin 's fluid.   Sections (7 &mu;m in
thickness) were stained with Mallory 's trichrome, or with Ehrlich 's
haematoxylin and eosin.   Observations were made by conventional
light microscopy (LM) on living encapsulated larvae, and
encapsulated and swimming larvae were observed by stereoscopic
microscopy.   Several hatched larvae were fixed in 10% formalin
and prepared as unstained whole mounts.  
        OBSERVATIONS      
        Light microscopy (stereoscopic study)      
    Egg capsules are transparent.   Encapsulated pairs of
larvae sometimes circle within the confined spaces of the eggshells
by the activity of locomotory cilia.   Each larva has two
eyespots, which shine brightly by reflected light.  
    The free-swimming larva frequently rotates about its
longitudinal axis and constantly changes shape by muscular
action.  
        Light microscopy (conventional light
microscopy)      
    Locomotory cilia cover the body of the living encapsulated
larva, beating in a pattern of metachronal waves.   The eyes are
embedded in the parenchyma, approximately one fifth of the body
length from the anterior end (Fig. 1).   Each eye is in part
composed of a translucent cup-shaped body (Fig. 1, cb), the cavity
of which encloses the light sensitive apparatus.   The cup-shaped
body, which contains no pigment granules, is oriented with the
concavity directed dorsolaterally.   When the eye is viewed with
the concavity upwardly directed, the middle region appears brown
(Fig. 1), often with a white spot at the centre.   An optic nerve
(Fig. 1, on) extends an appreciable distance posteriorly, and
enters the cerebral mass (Fig. 1, ce).  
      Kronborgia isopodicola   is unique among known
fecampiids in that the eyes persist throughout life,
notwithstanding an endoparasitic mode of existence and enclosure
within a cocoon in the final phase of the life history.   The eye
of the mature female is appreciably larger than the larval eye&semi;
observed in lateral view, it displays an outer red to reddish
purple colour, which appears to be located within the cup wall, and
an inner clear blue-green area.  
    In sectioned material the epidermis of the encapsulated
larva stains mauve with both Mallory 's triple dye and
haematoxylin-eosin.  
    Newly hatched larvae, mounted whole, were examined by
reflected light.   Although the eyes showed a reduced brilliance,
they were still visible as a pair of shining bodies against a black
background&semi; this property did not depend on their
orientation.  
        Electron microscopy (EM)      
      Egg capsule.     The egg capsule is
uniformly thin, and of moderate to high electron density (Fig. 2,
5, ec).  
      Epidermis.     The epidermis is composed
of multi-ciliated cells, with complete lateral walls (Fig. 3, cw).
  Epidermal cells are linked by encircling desmosomal structures,
viz. septa-containing junctions (Fig. 3, sj) overlain by zonulae
adhaerentes (Fig. 3, za).   The locomotory cilia are of the
9+2 type (Fig. 4), and each is supported by two cross-striated
rootlets.   Microvilli between the ciliary bases (Fig. 2, mv) are
topped with a fuzz of glycocalyx.   Ovoid epidermal protrusions
(Fig. 2,6, ep) are observed among the ciliary bases.  
  figure: Fig. 1  
  caption  
    In all specimens examined, numerous large, cylindrical
dense bodies (Fig. 2, 6, db) were the predominant constituents of
the epidermis.   These bodies show no apparent acidophilia by LM
techniques&semi; they are not found in ducts, nor are they found in
tissues beneath the epidermis.   Their elongate shape is neither
initiated nor maintained by microtubules.   The cylindrical dense
bodies are membrane-limited, and exist in two forms, granular and
vesicular.   The limiting membrane of the granular form is
associated with an underlying layer of dense material, and the
interior often contains clusters or strings of small vesicles.
  Vesicular bodies are surrounded by a compact coating of
electron-dense granules (Fig. 4,6,g).   The granular cylindrical
bodies are interpreted as phagosomes, and the vesiculated bodies as
vesicular lysosomes (Williams 1990b).   Phagosomes frequently
show a vesiculated portion consisting of accumulated membranes or
closely packed vesicles (Fig. 3, arrow).   Closed membrane
profiles among the cilia (Fig. 2,4,6, star) immediately overlie
both phagosomes and lysosomes.  
    Numerous vesicles (Fig. 2, v), some clear, some containing
a central mass of granular material, are concentrated in the
remaining cytoplasm.   Mitochondria (Fig. 3, M) are
plentiful, but ER cisternae and Golgi systems are rarely
encountered in the packed cytoplasm.  
    A clearly defined basal lamina (Fig. 2, bl) rests on a wide
fibrous layer (Fig. 2, fl).   Muscle cells of the subepidermal
strata (Fig. 2, mc) are attached to the internal surface of the
fibrous layer by hemidesmosomes.  
        Subepidermal glands      
    The parenchymal tissue is composed largely of interweaving
processes of the many subepidermal glands.   Cell extensions
containing spheroid or ovoid mucus globules (Fig. 7, Mg), showing
the characteristic delicate lines and stippling, occupy a
significant portion of the parenchyma.   The mucus globules are
6.4-0.7 &mu;m long.   Frequently seen are cell processes
containing elongate, ovoid, or conical granules marked by parallel
striations of variable width perpendicular to the long axis, or a
ripple pattern (Fig. 5,7, Ss).   The granules measure 0.4-0.5
&mu;m in length and 0.2-0.3 &mu;m in maximum diameter.
  Other ovoid secretory bodies within cell processes have
diameters similar to those of the striated granules, but are of
uniform, moderate electron density (Fig. 5, sb  1  ).  
    Additional cell extensions contain relatively large
secretory bodies (0.5-0.8 &mu;m in length, maximum diameter
of 0.4-0.5 &mu;m), spherical or slightly elongated in shape,
and of high electron density (Fig. 5,7, sb  2  ).   The
gland cell nucleus (Fig. 7, N) contains an eccentrically placed
nucleolus (Fig. 7, No).   Nuclear chromatin is mostly of the
finely dispersed type&semi; condensed chromatin occurs in small patches
(Fig. 7, cc) but does not form a layer opposed to the inner nuclear
membrane.   Glands of a further category contain moderately dense
secretory bodies (Fig. 5, sb  3  ), similar to the highly
dense granules in shape and dimensions.  
    Minute dense spheres, 0.1 &mu;m in diameter, are
enclosed in cell prolongations which extend towards the
subepidermal fibrous layer (Fig. 5, arrows).
  figure: Fig.2 and 3  
  captions  
  figure: Fig.4 and 5  
  captions  
  figure: Fig.6 and 7  
  captions  
  Striated granules (Fig. 5, Ssd), the smaller granules of
moderate density (Fig. 5, sb  1  d), and the dense spherules
were observed in microtubule-supported ducts passing through the
epidermis.  
      The eye.     The cup structure is formed
by a single cell (Fig. 8, 10).   Strictly, the cell is not
cup-shaped&semi; the rim is extended as arched, narrow folds or
flattened processes, the shape of which is supported and maintained
by microtubules (Fig. 8, mt).   The processes meet at the mid
point where they do not fuse, but are linked by junctional
structures (Fig. 10).   The cell accordingly takes the form of a
hollow sphere, with the bulk of cytoplasm and the nucleus on one
side.   Vacuoles (Fig. 8-10, va) are contained within or directly
underlie the narrow processes.  
    In the developing eye, the cup cell nucleus is large and
chromatin exists mainly in the dispersed form.   Small masses of
chromatin in the condensed configuration are observed (Fig. 8, cc)
with associated perichromatin granules (Fig. 8 crossed arrow)&semi;
there is little or no peripherally located condensed chromatin.
  The relatively clear cytoplasm contains Golgi systems (Fig. 9,
G) and mitochondria (Fig. 9, M).   Long, parallel endoplasmic
reticulum cisternae, largely devoid of bound ribosomes (Fig. 8,
ER), are characteristic of the differentiating cup cell.
  Membrane-limited dense granules (Fig. 8,9, dg) are thinly
scattered in the general cytoplasm&semi; they are concentrated in the
Golgi zones and adjacent to the plasmalemma bounding the concavity
of the cup.   The granules have no centres&semi; many central spaces
have sharply defined sides and angles, suggesting that crystal-like
material was lost during preparation of the material for EM.
  Large spherical or ovoid granules are found in the Golgi zones,
some apparently without crystal-shaped spaces (Fig. 9, star),
others evidently having contained organised crystals (Fig. 8,
star).   Granules near the concavity of the cup are smaller and
more elongate, with a reduced dense component&semi; they tend to be
aligned in rows parallel to the plasmalemma (Fig. 8).   Small
vesicles are interposed between the granules.  
    Also associated with the Golgi systems are coated vesicles
(Fig. 9, 10, cv), and distinctive membrane bounded vesicles, each
having a dense central granule
    surrounde    surrounded     by a clear halo (Fig.
9, hg).   The haloed granules are found also in the narrow
processes of the cup cell (Fig. 9  , 10, arrow).  
    In the fully differentiated ocellus, large areas of the
lucid cup cell cytoplasm are devoid of organelles.   Many
membrane-limited crystals, with little or no associated dense
material, are organised as uniformly shaped plates&semi; they are
disposed end-to-end in concentric layers (residual spaces shown in
Fig. 8, inset), in a regular bowl-shaped array.   Cytoplasm
between the plates is present as a filamentous and relatively dense
reticulum (Fig. 8, inset).  
    Each ocellus contains three photoreceptor cells (Fig. 9),
processes of which penetrate through membrane-limited spaces in the
narrow-walled portion of the cup cell.   The photosensitive
element of a receptor cell is a rhabdomere, a cluster of elongated,
unbranched microvilli (Fig. 8 and inset, 9, mv).   All receptor
cells possess photosensitive elements of the rhabdomeric type, the
microvilli lying parallel in a compact tuft.   The receptor cell
process spreads out as a bulbous enlargement immediately outside
the confines of the cup cell (Fig. 10)&semi; the nucleus
(Fig    ,    .     9, 10, N&prime;) is located level with the
cup cell nucleus (Fig. 10).   The three photoreceptor cells are
evenly spaced, and a section through the centre of the eyecup and
one receptor cell body generally does not pass through a second
receptor cell perikaryon (Fig. 9, 10).   A receptor cell is a
highly specialised bipolar neurone, the short process between
perikaryon and rhabdomere representing the dentritic fibre.
  Long axons from the receptor cells of each eye combines to form
the optic nerve.   Abundant large mitochondria (Fig. 9,
M&prime;), coated vesicles (Fig. 9,10,cv&prime;)and
glycogen granules (Fig. 9, gl) are present in the dendritic and
pericaryal cytoplasm.  
    Apposing membranes of receptor and pigment cells are
thickened and linked over wide areas as junctional structures (Fig.
9, 10, j) of septa-containing and zonulae adhaerentes types.  
    Invariably, a secretory cell process containing dense
spherules is inserted between each eye and the body wall (Fig.
6,8-10, Ng).   The spherules measure 0.2 &mu;m in diameter&semi;
in form and density they resemble neurosecretory granules.   The
secretory cell body is separated from the eye by a short distance,
and is located external to the perikarya of parenchymal glands.
  The epidermis overlying both the developing eye and the
differentiated  eye (Fig. 6) is unmodified&semi; cilia and dense
cylindrical bodies are present as usual, and the basal lamina and
fibrous layer are unattenuated.   The subepidermal muscle coats
appear unchanged.    
        DISCUSSION      
        Epidermis      
    Presumably certain proteins, such as membrane and
glycocalyx proteins and lysosomal enzymes, are produced by the
larval epidermis&semi; however, the sparse distribution of Golgi systems
and GER cisternae 
  figure: Fig.8  
  caption  
  figure: Fig.9  
  caption  
indicates that comparatively little protein synthesis occurs in the
epidermal cells, and no bodies corresponding with the
epitheliosomes of Tyler (1984) were observed.   Similarly,
K&oslash;ie &amp; Bresciani (1973) reported a scarcity of
cellular machinery for protein synthesis in the epidermis of the
free-swimming larval   K. amphipodicola  .   The general
epidermal cells of   Kronborgia   larvae therefore do not
appear to synthesise materials which subserve a function external
to the epithelium, with the exception of glycocalyx constituents
(for discussion of glycocalyx function see Williams 1950b).  
  figure: Fig.10  
  caption  
    In all examined encapsulated larvae, the large cylindrical
phagosomes and vesicular lysosomes were packed closely and occupied
a major portion of the epidermal volume, as also characterises the
parasitic male   K. isopodicola  .   By contrast, similar
lysosomal bodies of the parasitic female are widely spaced and do
not take up the bulk of the epidermal cytoplasm (Williams,
unpubl.).  
    Phagosomes evidently give rise to secondary lysosomes by a
process involving progressive vesiculation.   Closed membrane
profiles shed from the epidermal free surface probably represent
eliminated waste membranes of lysosomal activity.   The existence
of abundant vesicles and large lysosomes in the digestive epidermis
of the parasitic male   K. isopodicola   and a tendency for
the epidermis to give rise to surface protrusions, were reported
earlier (Williams 1990b).   These possibly function in the uptake
and processing of nutrients, or excretion.   Presence of such
structures in the encapsulated larva suggests that already at this
stage of development, despite enclosure of the animal within an
eggshell, the epidermis functions in nutrient uptake and digestion.
  Metabolites evidently pass through the thin, probably untanned
egg capsules&semi; the metabolites may be derived from substances
emitted from the shrivelling bodies of parent worms (Williams
1990a&semi; 1990c) into the matrix material of the cocoon cavity.  
    Descriptions are recorded of a variety of mechanisms for
the uptake of bulk nutrients by digestive epithelia of acoelomates.
  Sheet-like lamellae project from the intestinal epithelium of
the haemophagous trematode   Schistosoma mansoni  &semi; the
lamellae recurve to join the epithelial surface, so forming
blood-filled vacuoles (Morris 1968).   In a study of the
endocytosis of haemolysed blood by the ciliated intestinal
epithelium of the rhynchocoelan   Lineus ruber  , Jennings
(1969) found that substantial projections of the apical cytoplasm
fuse, engulfing the food and enclosing it in vacuoles which are
then interiorised.   The caecal epithelium of the aspidogastrid
  Aspidogaster conchicola   possesses surface lamellae which
branch, anastomose, and rejoin the surface, trapping particulate
food in the process (Halton 1972).   When prey organisms such as
ciliates pass into the intestine of the umagillid   Syndesmis
francescana  , opposing luminal surfaces of the intestinal
epithelium meet, causing local occlusions.   Apparently in this
manner the prey is enclosed in vacuoles which then become
intracellular (Holt &amp; Mettrick 1975).   The parasitic
turbellarian   Acholades asteris   feeds on host cells and
tissues via a ciliated epidermis.   Extracorporeal digestion
takes place, after which partially digested products are
endocytosed in large pinocytotic vesicles (Jennings 1989).   In
contrast, no morphological evidence for bulk uptake of nutrients
was observed in the epidermal epithelia of the encapsulated larval
  K. isopodicola   (present paper), the parasitic female
  K. amphipodicola   by Bresciani &amp; K&oslash;ie
(1970), or the parasitic male   K. isopodicola   by Williams
(1990b).   Presumably, low molecular weight organic substances,
from the matrix materials in the cocoon and the   hosts'  
coelomic fluids, pass across the apical epidermal plasma membranes
into the epidermal cells and there are catabolised by heterophagic
processes.  
    The epidermis of the encapsulated   K. isopodicola  
larva is protective, already possesses a functional locomotory
ciliation, and evidently functions in the uptake and catabolism of
nutrients and the elimination of waste products of heterophagy.
  Flame cells are found in the encapsulated larva (Watson et al.
in press), but major collecting canals and nephridiopores are
absent.   Correspondingly, the epidermis probably functions
significantly in osmoregulation and also in the elimination of
nitrogenous wastes&semi; it is presumably also active in respiration and
ionic regulation.   The epidermis is extraordinarily
multifunctional&semi; however, in the encapsulated larva and throughout
life in both sexes (Williams 1990b and unpublished observations),
the general epidermis of   K. isopodicola   differs from that
of many turbellarians in that it is not a secretory tissue.  
        Subepidermal glands      
    Mucus glands, glands synthesising striated secretory
granules and the smaller granules of moderate electron density, and
cells producing dense spherules are present in both males and
females at maturity, in addition to the encapsulated larvae&semi;
possible functions for the various secretions produced by adults of
both sexes were listed previously (Williams 1990b&semi; 1990c).
  K&oslash;ie &amp; Bresciani (1973) reported that the larva
of   K. amphipodicola   encysts on the surface of its host
before penetrating the host 's tissues, and the remaining two types
of secretory body of the larval   K. isopodicola   (the
larger moderately dense and highly dense granules) may be the
products of cystogenous glands.   Alternatively, the bodies may
represent the two principal secretory products confined to the
mature male, which they resemble&semi; all specimens examined were
perhaps developing males, the sex distribution possibly being
skewed so that the majority of larvae are potentially male.   It
is of interest that Christensen &amp; Kanneworff (1965), in a study of
sex distribution in   K. amphipodicola  , found 3-25 times
more males than females in a single host animal, the exact ratio
depending on the host species.  
      K. isopodicola   evidently is not a protandric
hermaphrodite.   The cocoon phase male dies without leaving the
cocoon or undergoing sex reversal.   During the parasitic phase,
males generally are distinguishable from developing females of
equivalent size by their flatter and more regular shape, and
frequently by an everted distal chamber of the male duct or the
presence of spermatozoa.  
        The eye      
    The fully differentiated eye of the larva of   K.
isopodicola   closely resembles the eye of the larval
  Polystoma integerrimum  , in which a pigment cup light
shield is absent, and light is concentrated by reflection (Fournier
&amp; Combes 1978).   In place of a pigment cup cell, the eye of
  Polystoma   possesses a cell that manufactures specialised
reflective plates (crystals), which are arrayed as a bowl-shaped
mirror.   The eye of   K. isopodicola   similarly has a
mirror cell in place of a pigment cup, the dimensions of the
crystals corresponding with those of   Polystoma  .   In
each instance there is no crystalline lens&semi; after incoming rays
have passed through the rhabdomeres, light is focussed by
reflection from the concave surfaces of the curved mirror plate
layers.   Incident light does not pass through the receptor cell
perikarya.  
      Polystoma   and   Kronborgia   are the only
platyhelminth genera known to possess an ocellar reflective
apparatus&semi; however, very similar reflective devices have been
described for other animals, such as the rotifer
  Asplanchna   (see Eakin &amp; Westfall 1965) and the scallop,
  Pecten  .   The functional principles of the
  Pecten   eye were investigated by Land (1965&semi; 1966).
  The mirror is a multilayer quarter-wavelength reflector, a
highly efficient reflective system which functions by the principle
of constructive interference.   Inner and outer surfaces of the
crystals are parallel, and all crystals have an optical thickness
of 1/4 wavelength.   Light passing through cytoplasm, reflected
from the inner surface of a crystal which has a higher refractive
index, undergoes a phase change of 1/2 wavelength.   Light
reflected from the outer interface, after passing twice through the
crystal, is retarded by 1/2 wavelength and emerges in phase with
the ray reflected from the inner interface, and constructive
interference results.   Reflectivity of the organ is greatly
enhanced by the presence of a number of crystal layers.   It is
assumed that intervening layers of cytoplasm also have an optical
thickness of 1/4 wavelength, so that light reflected at each
interface interferes constructively with light reflected from all
others&semi; by this device the reflectivity of an apparatus composed of
biological materials approaches that of a mirror of polished metal.
  The reflected light is coloured, according to the wavelength to
which the system is adapted.   In the   Pecten   eye, the
reflected light is blue-green&semi; i.e., it has a wavelength roughly in
the middle of the visible spectrum.   Any light transmitted
through the apparatus is of the complementary colour, red or
reddish purple.  
    The eye of the living   Polystoma   larva displays
outer bright red and inner clear blue layers (Zeller 1872,1876&semi;
Hesse 1897&semi; Andr&eacute; 1910&semi; Williams 1960).   These
colours have been interpreted as visual pigments (photopigments),
photochemical conversion of which was thought to initiate the nerve
impulse (Hesse 1897&semi; Andr&eacute; 1910).   The
correspondence with colours seen in the eye of the female
  Kronborgia   is striking.   In these two platyhelminth
genera, the colours may be produced by transmission and reflection
in the normal functioning of the eye, as outlined above.
  Alternatively, they may be caused by diffraction of the light
beam passing through the microscope, by the intricately
    structure    structured     crystal complex.
  Whichever is correct, the colours are not pigmentary, but
result from the physical interaction of light with the crystal
layers.  
    During development of the   Kronborgia   ocellus,
large dense granules arise in the Golgi zones of the cup cell.
  Crystals form within the granules, which then migrate towards
the concavity.   The granules elongate and align in regular
stacks, and the crystals give rise to uniformly shaped mirror
plates as the dense component is reduced.   The mirror is
envisaged as a stable structure, the aligned plates presumably
being linked and stabilised as a result of functional
characteristics of the interposed vesicles, or the nature of the
intervening modified cytoplasm.  
    Coated vesicles are interpreted as the transport form of
desmosomal constituents (Williams 1982).   Juxtaposed coated
vesicles in a receptor cell and mirror cell may fuse with the
plasma membranes, and flatten out to form the two halves of a
junctional structure.   It was suggested by Carpenter et al.
(1974) that desmosomes between the cup cell and receptor cells of
  Dugesia dorotocephala   may function to electrically
integrate movement of     tne    the     pigment
granules in light or dark adaptation with the photoresponse of the
rhabdomeres.   This does not apply to the eye of the larval
  Kronborgia   and although electrical and other interchanges
between the cells are not ruled out, clearly the desmosomes must
play an important role in maintaining the mechanical stability of
the organ in a vigorously moving animal.  
    Although most turbellarian photosensitive systems are of
the rhabdomeric type (references in Rees 1975&semi; Sopott-Ehlers 1984,
1988), some are of ciliary origin (references in Eakin &amp;
Brandenburger 1981&semi; Pike &amp; Wink 1986&semi; Rohde &amp; Watson 1990).
  Certain of the ciliary photoreceptive devices are composed of
essentially unmodified cilia&semi; among others, modification of the
organelles is extreme.   A common factor in all turbellarian
photosensory systems is the considerably expanded plasmalemma,
associated with a minimal quantity of cytoplasm.  
    A true lens in the eye of the oncomiracidium of
  Entobdella soleae   was described by Kearn &amp; Baker (1973),
and the eye of the cercaria of   Trichobilharzia ocellata  
possesses a lens-like structure of electron-dense material in a
process of the pigment cell (Van de Roemer &amp; Hass 1984).
  Although the fluid-filled vacuoles and narrow arched processes
of the mirror cell have the potential to refract light, no
specialised refractive apparatus serving to concentrate incoming
light was seen   in   the larval   K. isopodicola  
eye.  
    Platyhelminth eyes may undergo considerable morphological
change during light or dark adaptation (e.g., MacRae 1966&semi; Bedeni
et al. 1976&semi; Lanfranchi &amp; Bedeni 1982).   Material used in this
study was fixed immediately after removal from the cocoon under
laboratory conditions.   The typical microvillar structure of the
rhabdomeres evidently represents the configuration of the
photosensitive apparatus when adapted to subdued light, such as
might enter the cocoon through the nozzle opening.   Light rays
entering the cocoon would pass freely through the transparent
capsules.  
    Presumably, light impinging on the convex faces of the
mirror layers is reflected outwards&semi; the mirror may therefore
provide an effective light shield, as does the more commonly found
cup-shaped organisation of pigment granules.   Accordingly, light
reception is directional, and the direction of light passing
through the nozzle opening is probably detected by the hatched
larva.   Once released from the cocoon, the free swimming larva
is presumably able to distinguish between the direction of the
sunlit or moonlit sea surface and the direction of the dark rock
face or seabed, and a phototropic response may result.   When the
swimming larva rotates about its longitudinal axis, the refinement
of multidirectional scanning would be a possibility (see also Kearn
1978).  
    The mirror cell ocellus, providing both a focussing
mechanism and a light shield, appears to be more advanced than eyes
of the pigment cup variety.   Mirror cell eyes with similar
optical characteristics seem to have arisen independently by
convergent evolution in platyhelminths, rotifers, and molluscs.
  Whether or not the mirror cell of the larval   K.
isopodicola   is a modified pigment cell cannot be conjectured
at present.  
    Epidermal cells overlying the eyes of the polyclad
  Notoplana acticola   lack secretory products found in other
cells of the epithelium (MacRae 1966).   Very modified epidermal
cells and other tissues overlying eyes are found among planarians&semi;
dense structures are absent from these circular areas, which are
optically transparent.   Eyes are eccentrically placed in
relation to clear regions, lending the animals the characteristic
droll, cross-eyed appearance (e.g., Carpenter et al. 1974).   In
contrast, the eyes of the larval   K. isopodicola   are
overlain by unmodified epidermal cells, basal lamina, fibrous
layer, and muscle strata, in addition to presumed neurosecretory
cell processes&semi; also, incident light falling directly on the
rhabdomeres is unfocussed, only reflected rays being concentrated.
  Furthermore, the ocellus includes only three photoreceptor
cells.   Thus, the optical system, although it efficiently
gathers and enhances light energy, has a low optical resolution and
merely produces elementary images.   Nevertheless, the eye of the
swimming larva presumably is capable of detecting a sudden change
in illumination, as would occur when an animal passing between the
larva and the light source casts a shadow, and this specific
ability may assist in host location.   