  

          Chapter Three: The Treaty and the
Constitution      
    Three assumptions about parliamentary democracy in New
Zealand were taken for granted in the previous chapter.
  The first is that the will of the majority, as
demonstrated in Parliamentary elections, prevails.   The
second is that the will of the majority is equated for
electoral purposes with the number of candidates who win the
most votes in each electorate.   Ours is a first past the
post form of representation, not one based on proportional
representation.   The third is that Parliaments do not bind
their successors.   Each Parliament is sovereign&semi; laws
passed during the life of one Parliament can be reconsidered
in the future by another.  
    These assumptions have been the focus of much public
debate during the fourth Labour Government.   In many
respects that debate reflects similar debates in most other
democracies during the eighties.   The growth of executive
power is an international phenomenon and the continuing
question is how to find constitutional ways of curbing it.
  But as countries differ in their constitutional and
political arrangements so, too, do they differ in the specific
issues that are the focus of particular concern.   One of
the things that distinguishes the New Zealand debate is
the recognition to be given to the Treaty of Waitangi in any
changes in our formal constitution.   This, as we shall see,
was an issue of central importance in the deliberations of the
recent Royal Commission on Electoral Reform and in the White
Paper on a Bill of Rights for New Zealand.  
          The Crown in New
Zealand        
    The question that prompted all attempts at
constitutional reform in the 1980s was: How should the Crown
exercise its powers of sovereignty?   The words sovereign
and sovereignty express power and supremacy.   They are used
without limiting qualifications.   To have sovereignty is to
have the authority to make decisions and the power to carry
them out.  
    The Crown is one way of expressing sovereignty.   In
its figurative meaning, Crown is a king or queen, regal power,
the supreme governing power in a monarchy.   In the course
of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, British monarchs
gradually lost their personal right to sovereign power.
  The power of the Crown came to be exercised by ministers,
who made executive decisions in the name of the Crown, and by
Parliament, which legislated in the name of the Crown.
  Laws, once made, were administered not by the monarch but
by the courts in the interests of justice that was impartial
and fair to all citizens.  
    It was as the official agent of a ruling monarch that
Captain Hobson treated for the sovereignty of New Zealand.
  The Treaty of Waitangi joined New Zealand to the British
Empire in 1840 and our constitutional and political evolution
since then has been within the British tradition of
constitutional monarchy.   Under the Constitution Act 1986,
Queen Elizabeth II is the Queen of New Zealand.   All acts
of sovereignty affecting the lives of New Zealanders are made
under her symbolic authority.   In fact, they are made by
men and women who, through election or appointment, draw their
authority from the New Zealand Government.   But they
exercise that authority for the Crown in New Zealand.  
    The Crown in New Zealand - and in many other nations
of the Commonwealth - expresses a particular form of
constitutional monarchy.   New Zealanders of British lineage
can look back on an unbroken evolution of our constitutional,
legal and political institutions, and see them as the
continuing expression of a political democracy.   This gives
them great legitimacy in the minds of most New Zealanders, who
know that governments rule only for as long as they win enough
votes to stay in power.   Indeed, the concept of majority
rule is seen by many as the essential, defining feature of our
democracy.   Our notions of equality are commonly expressed
in terms of what a majority says or wants to happen.
  Usually, they focus on political matters - on the policies
and decisions of the government of the day and whether these
are thought to be in the best interests of the country as a
whole.  
    This is also a community in which the rule of law is a
basic value.   New Zealanders take it to be an essential
feature of a truly democratic society that no one is above the
law and no one should be given special privileges under it.
  Legal equality and political equality stem from the same
set of moral beliefs.   But equality is a slippery word.
  Equality before the law does not mean that distinctions
cannot be made in the circumstances of those whose rights are
to be judged in the courts.   It means that people in like
circumstances should be treated alike.  
    But who is to decide what, in any sphere of public
life, 'like circumstances' are to mean?   In New Zealand
that power is entrusted to a parliament which sits as a single
chamber made up of the elected representatives of the people.
  The powers of our national parliament are not restricted
as they are in federal systems such as Australia or Canada.
  There is no second chamber and, with it, the possibility
that another body of men and women may be responsive to points
of view that may not be represented in the House of
Representatives.   The constitution does not entrench rights
which can be tested in the courts against legislation passed
by Parliament.   New Zealand 's uncomplicated form of unitary
government is as pure an example of majority rule as can be
found in any parliamentary democracy.  
    The absence of restraints has not until recent decades
been thought to be a serious deficiency, so great has been the
equation of democracy and majority rule.   Indeed, the long
demise of the Legislative Council and its final abolition were
consequences of an enduring public opinion that a House of
nominated members should not be allowed to frustrate the
wishes of a majority of elected representatives.   The
Legislative Council had lost the power to delay legislation or
to be obstructive well before it was abolished in 1950.  
    That decision settled one political issue, only to
raise another.   A parliamentary democracy whose
sovereign power is vested in a single legislature of elected
representatives is not, without other safeguards, an obvious
champion of the freedoms of individuals or the rights of
minorities.   On the contrary, it is an expression of
majority power.  
    In the nineteenth century conception of the
Westminster system of parliamentary democracy, Parliament,
through its two houses, curbed the powers of the executive
government.   It retained an independent capacity to make
and amend the law, vote money, and impose taxes.   But in
its twentieth century practice, here and elsewhere in the
Commonwealth, the executive, through processes of party
discipline, dominates the legislature.   New Zealand, with a
single chamber through which the political will of the
majority party can be translated into law, experiences that
domination in an extreme form.  
    All democratic communities now face the problem of
curbing the executive.   Governments have become more and
more powerful and pervasive in the lives of the people.
  But societies have become more and more diverse in their
composition.   The international concern about human rights
is not directed only at totalitarian regimes.   In
democracies, too, questions are raised wherever there are
minorities whose interests cannot in all circumstances be
assured of protection by elected representatives drawn
predominantly, from the majority culture.  
    In New Zealand, answers to these questions are being
sought on four main fronts.   First, there is electoral
reform, which seeks, by changing the rules by which
parliamentarians are elected, to achieve a more accurate
reflection of the range of political opinion in the community.
  Second, there are reforms of Parliament itself, to ensure
that legislators are as open as possible to expressions of
public opinion when they are considering changes in the law.
  Third, there is the possibility of entrenching certain
rights and freedoms of citizens through a Bill of Rights which
would protect them against the possible exercise of
legislative power by a Parliamentary majority.   Fourth,
there is the devolution of the powers of central government on
to bodies which are expected to make their own decisions but
with proper public accountability.  
    Discussion of these important issues will be confined
here to treaty matters and to their implications for the
rights of Maori as tangata whenua.   Public debate has so
far resulted in no change in the electoral system and a
rejection of any transfer of power from Parliament to the
courts.   It is through parliamentary reform and
devolution of the powers of central government that practical
steps are being taken to curb the power of the executive.
  Parliamentary reform is discussed in this chapter, and
changes in the structures and processes of government in
chapter four.  
          Effective Maori
representation        
    All discussion of the sovereignty of the Crown in our
parliamentary democracy ends in paradox.   In the
constitutional formulations, the flow of power and authority
is from sovereign to subject, from the Crown high up to the
people beneath.   But the legitimacy of the Crown in New
Zealand derives from the votes of its adult citizens.
  Ruling parties must face the electors at least once every
three years.   Does, then, sovereignty rest ultimately with
the voting public?   And if it does, do our electoral
arrangements ensure that the diversity of views held by the
voting public are fairly represented in Parliament?   More
particularly, are the views and interests of Maori New
Zealanders represented fairly?    
    These questions were among the matters investigated by
the Royal Commission on the Electoral System, whose
report, 'Towards a Better Democracy' was published in December
1986.    1       The report was notable in at
least two respects.   First, it identified principles in the
light of which electoral systems should be judged for their
fairness and effectiveness.   Its analysis of our system and
its proposals for reform stemmed from those principles.
  Second, it applied these same principles to Maori
representation, and the conclusions it reached were as
important in shaping its recommendations as the ones that
emerged from its general analysis.   At all stages its
concern was to propose an electoral system that would fully
acknowledge the treaty rights of Maori as tangata whenua and
enable their expression in ways common to all New Zealanders.
  What it had to say about Maori representation highlighted
two ideals that are most difficult to achieve in any electoral
system: the effective representation of minority and special
interest groups and, at the same time, the experience of
political integration where different groups respect each
  others'   points of view but also have regard to the
good of the community as a whole.  
    Ours is an uncomplicated electoral system.
  Electors have one vote and they confer it on a candidate
who seeks to represent their electoral district.   Each
electorate is represented by one member and the candidate with
the most votes wins each seat.   The party with the largest
number of elected candidates wins the election and forms the
government.   There are ninety-three general seats and four
Maori seats.  
    It is popularly believed that this system allows the
wishes of the majority to prevail, but it seldom does.
  Only four of the seventeen governments elected since 1935
won more than 50 percent of all the votes cast.   All
governments since 1954 have been  'majority' governments
elected with less than 50 percent of the total vote.   In
two elections, 1978 and 1981, the party with the most votes
did not win the election.   The disparity between votes cast
and seats won is much greater for minor parties.   In 1981,
for example, Social Credit polled 20.5 percent of all votes
and won two seats.   In 1984 the New Zealand Party polled
12.3 percent of all votes and no seats.  
    The Royal Commission concluded that this system is
inherently deficient.     'The critical question
now,'   it said,   'is about the fairness and
equality of the ways in which the votes of New Zealanders, at
the national rather than the constituency level, are turned
into representation in
Parliament.'      2       It also
concluded that some form of proportional representation
offers the best answer.   It discussed various forms and
recommended the Mixed Member Proportional System (MMP).
  This, it believed,   'would be fairer to supporters
of significant political parties and likely to provide more
effective representation of Maori and other minority and
special interest groups.'      3    
  The result, it argued,  would be a more effective
Parliament.  
    Under MMP each voter would have two votes.   One
would go to constituency candidates who would stand in
sixty electoral districts.   The other would be for a party
list of candidates for sixty national seats.   The number of
seats each party won from the national list would be in
proportion to its percentage of the total vote.   That would
eliminate the present disparity between the number of votes
cast for a party and the number of seats it held in the House.
  There would be one general proviso: only parties with at
least one successful candidate or 4 percent of all list
votes would be eligible for list seats.   That would prevent
political fragmentation.   There would be no separate Maori
seats and no Maori roll.   Community interest among tribal
groups would, however, be taken into account when constituency
boundaries were drawn up.   And the 4 percent threshold for
list votes would not apply to parties primarily
representing Maori interests.  
    In the submissions to the Royal Commission there was a
clear difference of opinion about the desirability of separate
Maori representation.   The vast majority of non-Maori
submissions argued against it.   Most held it to be in
conflict with the principle of equality.   With one
exception, all Maori submissions wanted to keep it.
  They left the Royal Commission in no doubt about its
symbolic importance.   The four seats, it wrote, have
  'come to be regarded by Maori as an important
concession to and the principle expression of, their
constitutional position under the Treaty of
Waitangi'  .    4      
    The Royal Commission emphasised that, whatever changes
were made, Maori interests should be represented by MPs who
were also members of the Maori community.   That, however,
was a necessary but not a sufficient means of achieving their
effective representation.   As the report put it:
        In a democratic system, the
protection of minority interests ought to be the
responsibility of Parliament as a whole and not just of the
MPs who happen to belong to the minority group.   All MPs
ought to be accountable in some degree to Maori electors.
  Support of the majority of Maori interests is more likely
to be forthcoming if all Maori electors have an effective vote
- one which carries some weight in the election of
political parties to Government, and hence one for which
parties will need to compete.   An effective Maori vote
would have an important bearing upon the ways in which Maori
concerns are regarded both by the individual representatives
and by the political
parties.        5        
    The Royal Commission criticised the present form of
Maori representation because it ensures that the
representatives of the two communities, Maori and Pakeha, are
ultimately responsible only to the constituencies that elected
them.   The problems that this poses for Maori MPs are in
principle the problems of any small minority: how to get the
dominant majority to respect their rights and attend to their
interests.   What is less well understood is that separate
representation does not give the majority any political
incentive to take Maori seriously.   That leaves members of
the Maori community powerless unless, through electoral means,
they can use their votes to make parties and governments
attentive to their concerns.   Separate representation
coupled with minority status has ensured the
  'political dependency of the Maori people and their
exposure to non-Maori control over their destiny and
future.'      6      
    The report argued that the MMP system based on a
common electoral roll is the best way to achieve the effective
representation of Maori interests.   Maori and part-Maori
electors make up about 10 percent of all voters.   Their
vote for national party lists would give all political parties
something to compete for.   It would offer   'Maori
considerable scope for developing their potential voting
strength and for charting their own political
future.'      7      
    The Royal Commission emphasised that changes in the
electoral system are only part of what is needed to give
adequate protection to Maori rights in our constitutional and
political system.   Five other steps also need to be taken.
  First, Maori should have greater control over their own
affairs as iwi and hapu.   Second, there should be greater
statutory protection for Maori rights recognised in the
treaty.   Third, there should be an independent statutory
body to deal with complaints that those rights were not being
honoured.   That requirement was being addressed through
the Waitangi Tribunal.   Fourth, the treaty might be given
the status of supreme law as proposed in the draft Bill of
Rights which was also the subject of public discussion while
the Royal Commission was at work.   Fifth,   'the
constitutional position of the Maori people might be more
formally recognised in our legislative processes and
institutions.'     It therefore recommended that
  'Parliament and Government enter into consultation and
discussion with a wide range of representatives of the Maori
people about the definition and protection of the rights of
the Maori people and the recognition of their
constitutional position under the Treaty of
Waitangi.'      8      
  box  
    After its publication, the Royal Commission 's report
was referred to the parliamentary Electoral Law Committee,
which considered a large number of public submissions on it.
  The Labour and National parties had not in the past been
impressed with the merits of proportional representation.
  Neither the arguments of the Royal Commission nor the
opinions expressed in response to it changed their
positions.  
    The select committee acknowledged that the present
system is unfair to minority parties and special interest
groups.   But it concluded that   'proportional
representation would achieve fairness to the voting public at
the expense of single-party government - and that it opposed.
    Its studies suggested that in none of the elections of
the last thirty years would any one party have been able to
form its own government if MMP had been used.   New Zealand
would have had coalition or minority governments and the
choice of Government would not have been made by the voter but
would have been made indirectly by the representatives of the
various parties in the House.  '     The experience
of some other countries is that the party with the highest
percentage of the vote can find itself in opposition to a
coalition led by another major party it has  'defeated' in the
poll.   (This happened following the Norwegian general
election in 1989.)   Coalition government, the committee
felt,   'can never be truly accountable to the
electorate as the voter is not really sure whom to blame for
the implementation of bad policies or legislation.'  
  It was therefore   'firmly of the opinion that the
election of the government is one of the strongest arguments
supporting the retention of the present
system.'      9      
    On the subject of Maori representation, submissions to
the committee remained polarised.   Maori leaders were
obviously not persuaded that their rights would be protected
better under MMP.   With one exception, they wanted the
present system to be retained, and they also wanted the number
of Maori seats to reflect more accurately the number of Maori
who opt for the Maori roll.   The Government members of the
committee recommended that separate Maori seats should be
retained, with a statutory minimum of four seats.   They
also recommended changes in the rules for estimating the
number and size of Maori electorates.  
    The Electoral Law Committee reported back in December
1988.   It recommended, and the House agreed, that the
present voting system should continue.   The Labour
majority also recommended, however, that questions about a
limited form of proportional representation and the length of
the term of Parliament be submitted to an indicative
referendum.   David Lange had given an undertaking in August
1987 that a Labour Government would hold a referendum on
proportional representation.   In October 1987 the
Government announced its agreement in principle to hold one,
but in April 1989, after debate within the Labour Party,
decided against it.   Then, in March 1990, the Opposition
took up the larger issue of Parliamentary reform in response
to the speed with which the Government had put through
legislation for the sale of Telecom, and to the late addition
to a Bill that required private broadcasters to make
broadcasting time available to political parties during
election campaigns.     'We have no second
chamber'  , Hon. Jim Bolger argued,   'no written
constitution or bill of rights, and our Parliament is elected
on a first past the post
basis.'      10       The National Party
is preparing a policy statement on political reform which is
expected to include proposals for proportional representation
and a second chamber.   John Terris M.P. and Jim Anderton
M.P. proposed private member 's bills on proportional
representation for consideration during the 1990 session of
Parliament, and John Terris 's Bill was given a first reading
in May.   The Government reconsidered its position, and the
Prime Minister announced that it would introduce legislation
this year to hold a referendum at the same time as the 1992
local body elections.   Mr Bolger has said that a National
government would hold a referendum before 1993.
  Proportional representation is on the political
agenda.  
    The value of the public discussion initiated by the
Royal Commission 's report is that it has changed the context
within which arguments about our electoral arrangements are
now conducted.   People are becoming more aware of the
differences of opinion, interest and allegiance that are to be
found in the voting community.   They are also coming to
value, or at least accept, expressions of minority opinion
that may not be compatible with the views of one or other of
the two main parties.   MMP may not be the answer, but the
pressure for proportional representation in some form seems
likely to increase as time goes on.  
    One of the important gains is the attention that has
been given not only to Maori electoral rights but also to
their constitutional and political rights.   Where, in the
past, Maori representation had been seen as something of
concern only to Maoridom, the Royal Commission 's report
underlined its significance for all New Zealanders.
  Central to its report was its understanding of what the
Treaty of Waitangi signified.   To the Royal Commission
  'it marked the beginning of constitutional government
in New Zealand.'      11       The
Electoral Law Committee agreed that this opens up very large
issues about the expression of Maori interests and the
recognition of Maori rights in our constitutional and
political systems.   It therefore supported the Royal
Commission 's recommendation that   'the issues of
the definition and protection of Maori rights and their
constitutional position under the Treaty of Waitangi needed to
be addressed in a comprehensive and systematic
way.'     It   'envisaged that there should be a
constitutional partnership between the Crown and the Maori
people.'      12      
      These are the responses of Parliamentarians who
recognise that our present constitutional arrangements are not
as responsive to Maori interests and concerns as they
should be.   Changes are called for, but it is not clear
what these should be or how they might take place.   The
first task is therefore for members of the two institutions
that exercise the sovereignty of the Crown - Parliament
and the Government - to open up a dialogue with Maori
leaders.      

  

          What Did the Shark Say to the
Kahawai?      
        Metaphors of Culture Within Ethnic Relations
Discourse in New Zealand      
      Jeffrey Sissons  
    Department of Anthropology  
    University of Otago    
        Introduction      
    Some years ago, a colleague suggested that it might be
useful to think of culture as a fruit cake - an edible
'gestalt', greater, when baked, than the sum of its parts (or
ingredients).   Cultural rules could be likened, it was
suggested, to a recipe that was carefully followed or
partially improvised.   Most sociologists and
anthropologists would probably find this metaphor somewhat
idiosyncratic, yet it is hardly more colourful than many of
the more conventional images routinely employed in academic
and more popular discussions of Maori-Pakeha relations in New
Zealand.   The process of cultural assimilation, for
example, is often described in terms of a digestive metaphor:
      When Pakehas tell us we ought
to assimilate... it is like a shark saying 'let  '  s
assimilate' to a kahawai and then opening his mouth and
swallowing him for breakfast   (Metge,
1976:305).    
    Many writers in the field of ethnic relations write,
and presumably 'think', about culture as if it had objective
properties, even when they explicitly acknowledge that
'culture' is an abstract analytical concept.   In other
words, they reify culture in culturally conventional ways.  
    The inspiration for this paper arose while I was
reviewing the reports and minutes of a governmental Maori
advisory group.   This group was officially designated a
'cultural' advisory body and     it 's    its    
name reflected     it 's    its     primary
emphasis upon combating the lack of understanding of, and
sensitivity towards, Maori culture in one corner of the state
bureaucracy.   While reading through the official documents,
I noticed that on a number of occasions, culture was likened
to a spiritual essence or 'wairua'.   As recorded in the
minutes of one meeting, held in 1988, a central objective was
to ensure that Maori culture should   'flow'  
through the staff of the institution.   At a later meeting,
it was agreed that there was an urgent need to   'instil
wairua into the system'  .   Since the work of Sapir
and Crocker (1977), Ortney (1979), Lakoff and Johnson (1980),
Salmond (1982) and Parkin (1984), the political significance
of metaphor in directing our thought and action has become
widely acknowledged.   Because metaphors predispose us to
understand problems in certain conventional (and
unconventional) ways, they also encourage us to favour certain
 'solutions'.   If culture is assumed to be a spiritual
essence or force which, like the Holy Spirit (Wairua Tapu in
Maori), might flow through a collectivity, then the solution
to the problem of institutional discrimination and
monoculturalism takes on a religious or missionary aspect.
  People need to be encouraged to open their 'hearts and
minds' to Maori culture by those who can show them the way.
  Cultural  'missionaries' are required to teach the cultural
message and so break down the prejudice which blocks the
'flow' of culture throughout the system.  
    Alerted to the fact that these idealist reifications
of culture were influencing efforts to counter ethnic
inequality and negative discrimination within one
state-bureaucratic arena, I began to wonder what other
reifications might be active within the wider field of ethnic
politics in New Zealand.   In this article, I propose to
identify and discuss some of these more conventional
metaphors.   I begin with a review of some recent critiques
of the 'ethnicity as culture' approach to ethnic relations in
New Zealand and seek to clarify its ideological grounding.
  I then go on to identify some of the key reifications of
culture within New Zealand 's ethnic relations discourse over
the last fifteen years or so, and show how these naturalise
and 'fix' idealist understandings of Maori-Pakeha relations,
thus reproducing the ideological grounding of the 'ethnicity
as culture' approach.   I conclude by suggesting that this
analysis might be extended into a critique of biculturalism
and multiculturalism as ideology.      
        The Ethnicisation of Culture    
    Over the past few years, the value of culturalist
understandings of ethnicity and ethnic politics in New Zealand
has been increasingly questioned by sociologists,
anthropologists and educationalists.   In general, two main
criticisms have been directed at this 'ethnicity as culture'
approach: firstly, it is excessively idealist, and secondly,
it mistakenly equates ethnic boundaries with cultural ones.
  In what follows, I briefly review each of these
criticisms.  
    One of the earliest critiques of idealist analyses of
ethnicity in New Zealand was Miles and Spoonley 's (1985)
article in the   Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Sociology.     Directing their Althusserian-inspired
attack specifically at Pearson (1983) and Pitt and Macpherson
(1974), they argued against privileging the
  'consciousness of cultural origins'   over
  'the differential distribution of agents to various
sites in class relations'   (Miles and Spoonley,
1985:21-22).   These authors proposed instead that ethnicity
be approached through a study of the political economy of
labour migration.   More recently, Spoonley has reiterated
his claim that to analyse ethnic relations in terms of
cultural difference is to remain at an ideological level:
        One of the problems with an
analysis of 'ethnicity as culture' is that it abstracts the
practise of ethnicity from its economic and political context
and leaves any analysis open to charges of being idealist.
  Ethnicity as a form of economic and political mobilisation
assumes that... ideological relations and effects (i.e. those
associated with ethnicity)... intersect with class and gender
relations as part of the complex relations of
capitalism   (Spoonley, 1991:156).      
    Pearson, while not accepting that Miles and Spoonley 's
Marxist approach is   a priori   any less ideological
than his own Weberian position (Pearson, 1985: 272-273),
agrees with Spoonley on the need to go beyond culture and
examine the material foundations of ethnicity:
        One does not have to be a
Marxist to acknowledge that much recent debate about ethnicity
in New Zealand is so enraptured by ideas and identities that
it forgets to examine the material conditions which influence
their formation   (Pearson,
1990:239).      
    If one assumes that culture is primarily an
ideological system or a    'system of symbols and
meanings in terms of which a particular group of people make
sense of their world'   (Metge, 1976:45), then the above
criticisms by Spoonley and Pearson are undoubtedly
well-directed.   If, on the other hand, culture is conceived
of as a total   'way of life'   (James and
Saville-Smith, 1989:13),   'the total lifestyle of a
people... all of the ideas, knowledge, behaviour and material
objects they share'   (Sullivan and Thompson, 1984:35),
or an anthropological equivalent to the sociological concept
of  'society' (Nash, 1990:99), then the critical edge of these
    authors      authors'       comments is
blunted.   They leave open the possibility for advocates of
the 'ethnicity as culture' approach to stretch their
essentially idealist concept of culture to accommodate
materialist critiques.  
    A more powerful line of attack is to observe that the
'ethnicity as culture' approach mistakenly equates ethnic
boundaries with cultural ones.   This second line of
argument has also been advanced by Pearson and Spoonley, and
it has been less directly pursued by Nash.   Pearson has
noted that the discussion of biculturalism and
multiculturalism in New Zealand has been
  'bedeviled'   by misconceptions concerning the
terms 'race', 'culture', 'ethnicity',  'state' and 'nation'.
  With reference to the 'culture-ethnicity' distinction, he
points out that:
        Ethnicity is not culture
  per se  .   The notion of 'two [main] cultures' in
New Zealand is just as meaningless as 'two races'.   However
we define 'culture', and the word is as contested or taken for
granted among anthropologists as  'society' is within
sociology, it has much wider boundaries than ethnicity  
(Pearson, 1991:196).      
    Spoonley agrees:
        ...ethnicity is not the same
as culture.   All of us 'have culture' [or live culture] but
ethnicity concerns social networks which rely on an explicit
consciousness of difference...   [Ethnicity] can exist as an
alternative to other forms of political consciousness and
political activity, such as class, or it can reinforce
them   (Spoonley, 1991:156).      
    For Nash, also, New Zealand cannot be said to comprise
two distinct ethnic cultures, Maori and Pakeha (Nash 1990:
99-100).   Rather, New Zealand is a highly integrated
society within which a   'Maori cultural system'  
is   'embedded'  .   While this Maori
   'socio-system'   constitutes a   'partial
society'  , he argues that there is no equivalent
  'Pakeha society'   at the systemic level.
  Nash is critical of the way biculturalist discourse
directs attention   'towards the analysis of Maori
culture and Pakeha culture and, what is more, to culture
conceived as a reified idealist abstraction'   (Nash,
1990:99).  
    In concurring with these writers on the need to
radically dis-articulate culture and ethnicity, I would like
to go further and suggest that while it makes analytical sense
to talk of culture in the singular, it does not make sense to
then reify this concept and talk of cultures (plural) as if
they were empirical phenomena whose boundaries might be
somehow empirically determined.   While nations, regions,
classes, age-groups, men and women,   and ethnic
groups   differ culturally in some respects, they also
share, to a greater or lesser extent, cultural conventions
meanings and values.   It makes no sense, therefore, to say
that these groups   are   distinct cultures or
  have   distinct cultures.   At most we can say that
there are profound   cultural differences   between
them.   Leach, who has made this argument most forcefully in
his introduction to social anthropology, warns:
        So beware.   When you
encounter an anthropologist who writes about cultures in the
plural, or who writes as if the culture of a society were like
a unique set of clothes in which each garment can be
separately described independently of any of the others, watch
out!   In all probability the   decoupage  , the
discontinuity that separates one culture from another or one
cultural trait from another, exists only in the mind of the
anthropologist observer   (Leach,
1982:43).      
    In relation to the interpretation of ethnicity, the
plural-culture approach identified and criticised by Leach
participates in and reinforces an   ethnicisation of
culture  .   This term refers to an ideological process
through which the ethnic dimension of cultural difference is
privileged above all other dimensions.   It usually entails
an association of different cultures (plural) with different
ethnic categories or groups, and an explanation of relations
between these categories or groups primarily in terms of
differences between cultures.   The ethnicisation of culture
is thus also an idealisation of ethnicity in the sense
criticised by Miles, Spoonley and Pearson.   In other words,
taken to its logical limits, the second critique of the
'ethnicity as culture' approach (that it mistakenly equates
ethnic boundaries with cultural ones) is more profound in that
it is able to encompass the argument that the approach is
excessively idealist.  
    It is clear that the ethnicisation of culture has
significantly influenced debates about the future direction of
ethnic relations policy in New Zealand.   Perhaps less
obvious is the fact that it has also strongly influenced the
direction of ethnic relations research.   Because the
ethnicisation of culture effects an ideological backgrounding
of non-ethnic cultural differences, the study of cultural
diversity within Maori society remains a poorly developed area
of inquiry.   In particular, class, gender and generational
differences within Maori society are rarely discussed in the
'ethnicity as culture' literature in New Zealand (Larner,
1991:63).   Naive notions of a homogeneous Pakeha culture
also abound.   Finally, the extent of cultural sharing
between Maori and Pakeha is under-researched and little
understood (Spoonley, 1988:127&semi; 1991:165-166&semi; Pearson,
1990:239-247&semi; Nash, 1990:112-113&semi; Webster, 1989:55).  
    Despite scholarly challenges, the 'ethnicity as
culture' approach remains extremely influential in popular,
official and academic discourse on Maori-Pakeha relations in
New Zealand.   Part of the reason for its resilience in the
face of criticism is its firm ideological grounding in
commonsense reifications of culture.   These reifications,
or metaphors of culture, assume and 'naturalise', in a largely
unconscious way, an ethnicised understanding of culture.
  In the next section, I identify and discuss some of the
more pervasive and influential of these metaphors.   I do so
in the hope that by highlighting the largely unconscious role
that these reifications play in the ethnicisation of culture,
it is possible to gain a better general understanding of the
ideological nature of culturalist discourse.  
        Culture: Key Reifications in Ethnic Relations
Discourse      
    A survey of the literature on ethnic relations
produced in New Zealand over the last fifteen
years    1        1    The
following publications were surveyed:   references  
   suggests that the reification of culture has
clustered around five key metaphors.   These are:
M1-  Culture is food  &semi; M2-  Culture is a
stream  &semi; M3-  Culture is an environment  &semi;
M4-  Culture is a living organism  &semi; M5-  Culture is
a group  .   In what follows, I exemplify and briefly
comment on each of the above, noting significant metaphoric
entailments where relevant.  
      M1 -   Culture is food      
    This metaphor is regularly employed in discussions of
Maori education and problems experienced by young Maori.
  Thus, the Secretary of Maori Affairs, concerned about the
future of urban Maori youth, insisted that:
        Economic doors must be
unlocked and the cultural knowledge of Maoritanga passed on if
hungry generations are to be fed   (Maori Affairs,
1984:3).      
    Lack of cultural 'nourishment' is sometimes identified
as leading to low self-esteem with a consequent lack of
educational success.   Hence, culture is a nourishing source
of personal identity and self esteem.
        Maori youths raised in the
positive strengths of their culture are able to largely escape
the worst effects of this cycle of deprivation  
(Jackson, 1988:101).      
      M2 -   Culture is a stream      
    This metaphor assumes and reinforces pluralist and
relativist political positions&semi; one society, many cultures,
each, in principle, equal to all others.
        They merely wish to control
their land, resources and cultural destiny.   Surely that is
an acceptable level of devolution in a society with two main
cultural streams?   (Walker,
1987:110).      
    Perhaps this reification is related to   culture is
a spiritual essence   used in the cultural advisory group
discussions referred to earlier.   If different cultural
streams flow through a single society, then Maori culture
should flow through the bureaucratic institutions of that
society.  
      M3 -   Culture is an
environment      
    Here is a reification of culture as it has been
classically presented in anthropological writing&semi; water is to
fish as culture is to people.   In both cases, the
environment is taken-for-granted.
        As they have come out of
cultural isolation into the mainstream of New Zealand life,
the Maori people have become not less but more aware of their
identity as a group.   When we are totally immersed in our
own culture we live in it like a fish in water   (Metge,
1976:53).      
    This quotation suggests a figurative association
between this metaphor and M2 in that it is implied that Maori
people moved from a rural backwater into a  'mainstream'
environment.  
      M4 -   Culture is a living
organism      
    Seeking to counter assimilationist models and
assumptions that Maori culture is a relic of the past,
commentators regularly point to the contemporary 'living'
nature of Maori culture:
        I insisted that Maori culture
was neither dead nor dying nor a mere aggregate of survivals
but a living organism made up of functionally interrelated and
dynamically interacting parts   (Metge,
1976:318).    
        Culture is a living force
that adapts, with time, to both the physical and social
environment.   Some people may wish to freeze a
culture...   (Race Relations Conciliator,
1982:18).      
    The representation of culture as a life-form implies a
number of entailments.   As a species, culture may be
  indigenous   to a locality:
        However indifferent Pakehas
might be to Maori culture it cannot be avoided entirely
because it is indigenous and much more pervasive than people
realise   (Walker, 1987:148).      
    Irrespective of whether or not it is indigenous,
culture may   spread  :
        ...with rare exceptions all
our leadership in the religious, intelligentsia and
professional arena, married white people.   This increased
Maori women 's inferiority complexes and further spread white
culture through Maoridom   (Awatere,
1984:85).      
    The spreading of one culture may   kill off  
another:
        But kill off that culture and
Maoris will have to re-invent Black Power (which some have
done)   (Walker, 1987:220).      
    It is important, therefore, that efforts be made to
  preserve   this endangered species:
        Furthermore, as the Maoris
have strived to preserve their culture and language, their
separate identity needs to be accepted and conditions created
for its continued sustenance   (Levine and Vasil,
1985:14).      
      M5 -   Culture is a group      
    If culture is a group, then it is something to which
we   belong  , something we are   born into   and
are   part of  .   However, not all of us identify
strongly enough with our groups.   Maori generally accept
that they 'belong' to a culture but many Pakeha do not.
        There is still a distinct
Maori culture... those who clearly belong to this culture are
genuine Maori   (Mulgan, 1989:7).    
        By denying they are part of a
culture, they can deny the destructive impact that culture has
on others   (Atareta Poananga, quoted by Spoonley,
1988:67).      
    This reification often underpins more radical
rhetoric, assuming a wide range of entailments.   If
cultures are groups then, like groups, they may be
  insulted  .
        This was a confrontation
between engineering students practising what they saw as a
harmless mock haka, and a group of young Maori and Pacific
Island people, who objected to what they saw as a racist
offence against Maori culture   (Yensen et. al. eds.
1989:90).      
    Cultures may also have collective   opinions  .
  This is the central metaphor that informs Sharp 's recent
book,   Justice and the Maori  .
        And much discussion of the
relations between Maori and Pakeha did in fact take the form
of disagreements between cultures about justice  
(Sharp, 1990:32).      
    It follows that cultures may also have different
collective   aspirations  .
        Cultural sensitivity must
play a greater part in the education system - which has been
slow, in the past, to recognise the aspirations of other
cultures   (Kawharu, 1989:283).      
    Cultures may or may not   understand   each
other.
        The dominant Pakeha culture
has made too little attempt to understand minority Polynesian
cultures   (Race Relations Conciliator,
1982:12).      
    And, on the basis of misunderstandings, cultures may
  interact  .
        In the Maori perspective of
our history since 1840 the dominating theme is the interaction
of our two cultures   (  Puao-te-ata-tu  ,
1988:5).      
    Cultures may become   aggressive  .
        Pakeha culture is less well
defined than Maori culture yet, paradoxically, has a more
aggressive thrust to it   (Levine and Vasil,
1985:15-16).      
    So much so that they may   dominate and
destroy   each other.
        ...it is these very key
concepts which have allowed white culture to invade and
dominate, eliminate languages, spirituality, to destroy with a
never-ending, mind-boggling blindness.   One of these key
concepts is individualism   (Awatere,
1984:60).    
        Throughout his talk a feeling
that white culture has harnessed the forces for evil hung
unspoken in the air.   Then last week in a television
programme on the Rasta movement one man said it straight out.
  White Culture is a Force for Evil.   Makes you think.
  No other culture has survived it   (Awatere,
1984:53).      
    Cultures may   join or combine  .
        Although correct
pronunciation of Maori is a step towards bi-culturalism, the
ultimate conjunction of the two cultures occurs on marae,
especially those built in urban areas.   Increasingly
Pakehas have been exposed to marae experiences...  
(Walker, 1987:148)      
    Or they may   borrow   from each other.
        Such borrowing is part of all
cultural interaction, and does not make the 'borrowing'
culture subordinate to the one it borrows from   (Yensen
et. al. 1989:60).      
    As ethnic groups, cultures are ideally of   equal
status  . 
        Separate cultural identity
need not be threatening, and should not be, if all cultures
are acknowledged as having equal status and all ideas of
cultural superiority over one another are disposed of  
(Stokes, 1985:6).      
    One final reification, a variation on one alluded to
in the title of this article, entails a rare double metaphor:
culture is a group which is in turn a species of fish.
        The dominant culture refers
to this as assimilation.   Like a shark swallowing a
herring, it gobbles up the minority culture and although the
cells from the herring are now part of the shark - none of the
smaller fish is recognisable   (Race Relations
Conciliator, 1982: 13).      
      Culturalism and Biculturalism    
    Metaphor often directs our thinking about phenomena
into conventionally accepted channels.   In so doing, it can
act as a conservative influence, reinforcing certain
ideological modes of understanding at the expense of others
less firmly grounded in conventional imagery.   The key
metaphors identified in the previous section help naturalise
and conventionalise a culturalist understanding   of  
ethnic relations.   By implicitly asserting a direct
correspondence between ethnic and cultural boundaries, they
effect an ethnicisation of cultural difference.  
    Key metaphor M1-  culture is food  , reifies
culture as a form of ethnic nourishment, an ethnic essence
necessary for the survival of the ethnic group.   With key
metaphors M2-  culture is a stream  , and
M3-  culture is an environment  , cultural differences
(between streams or environments) are assumed to correspond to
ethnic differences.   Key metaphor M4-  culture is a
living organism  , represents culture as a localised
 'species' that lives, adapts ind dies.
      It 's    Its     relationships with other
living organisms is directly analogous to relations between
ethnic groups.   Finally, M5-  culture is a group  ,
most directly ethnicises cultural difference because it
assumes an identity between a group (an ethnic group) and a
particular culture.  
    While the prevalence of culturalist assumptions within
popular discourse about ethnic relations in New Zealand is
regrettable, their strong and continuing presence in official
and academic writing is a more serious matter.   The
ethnicisation of culture in official reports (e.g. Jackson,
1988&semi; Ministerial Advisory Committee, 1988&semi; Race Relations
Conciliator, 1982&semi; Royal Commission on Social Policy, 1987)
and academic writings (e.g. Metge, 1976&semi; Mulgan, 1989&semi; Stokes,
1985&semi; Sharp, 1990) provides a far too simplistic basis for
policy decision and academic research.   By not confronting
class, gender and generational dimensions of cultural
difference within Maori society and by idealising the logic
and processes of capitalist expansion (a world-historical
phenomenon), these and other culturalist accounts are unable
to offer radical solutions to chronic ethnic inequality in New
Zealand.  
    These weaknesses are particularly evident in the way
many commentators and policy-makers understand the concepts of
'biculturalism' and  'multiculturalism'.   To the extent that
these concepts also assume a reification of culture (as
cultures) and an ethnicisation of cultural difference, they
must also be considered as ideological, obscuring or
misrepresenting the way ethnicity is embedded within the
class-based relations of capitalism.   When New Zealand
society is conceptualised as consisting of 'two main cultural
streams', two distinct cultural 'environments' or 'worlds', an
'indigenous' and a 'non-indigenous' culture, or two cultures
that 'interact' and  'misunderstand' each other, then a great
deal more is obscured than is revealed about the nature of
ethnic inequality in New Zealand.  
      It is true, as a number of commentators have
pointed out, that biculturalism is an ambiguous concept which
has taken on a wide range of meanings in New Zealand 's ethnic
relations discourse (Pearson, 1991:203&semi; Nash, 1990:99).   At
one end of the spectrum is Schwimmer 's definition of a
bicultural society as one in which   'each culture makes
creative use of the other'  , a society in which
  'two conflicting value systems'   are each
accepted as valid (Schwimmer, 1960:13).   The view that
biculturalism means a  'more or less' equal distribution of
resources and power between Maori and Pakeha belongs at the
other, more radical, end of this spectrum (Pearson,
1990:234-236&semi; Spoonley, 1989:99).   In between are
definitions which stress greater cultural autonomy and
political influence for Maori as one of two peoples in
Aotearoa/New Zealand (Mulgan, 1989:9&semi; Yensen et. al.,
1989:15).   Strictly speaking, therefore, only those
definitions towards the conservative end of the spectrum
strongly reify culture and fully participate in the
ethnicisation of cultural difference.   Nevertheless, the
more radical proposals do take on a certain liberal
respectability by adopting a biculturalist accent.   Indeed,
I would suggest that the ideological value of biculturalism
derives in no small measure from this very ability to
encompass and fudge differences between widely divergent
political viewpoints.   In this sense, like multiculturalism
in Australia, it has become a   'necessary
ideology'   (Castles et. al., 1988, quoted by Pearson,
1991:203).  
      Conclusion    
    In naturalising and conventionalising a culturalist
understanding of ethnic relations in New Zealand, the key
metaphors with their entailments identified in this article
constitute a commonsense, and perhaps essential, grounding for
biculturalism and multiculturalism as ideological discourses.
  Any materialist social analysis must, of course, seek a
level of understanding beyond that of commonsense, and the
critique of ideology will always be an integral part of such
an endeavour.   This article has sought to contribute to the
development of such a critique by focusing on the language of
culturalism and biculturalism.   At one level, this has been
an exercise in deconstruction, a questioning of the
taken-for-granted metaphors that underpin culturalist language
in order to undermine its authority.   But by highlighting
the subtle and largely unconscious influence of culturalist
metaphors in ethnic relations discourse, this analysis also
underscores the difficulties of popularising more materialist
understandings of ethnic inequality in New Zealand.
  Indeed, it seems that in the ebb and flow of public
debate, we will be forced to witness many more replays of the
shark and the kahawai 's brief but tragic encounter.  
  acknowledgements  
  references      
  

        2.      
      The Girls    
    There are nineteen Pacific Islands girls in 4 Mason.
  Most of the   girls'   parents had come to New Zealand
in the 1960s before their daughters were born&semi; from Western
Samoa (6), Cook Islands (5), Tonga (3), Niue (3), and Tokelau
(2).   Some had come in the early seventies, when the
children were young.   All except Ana had been to primary
school in New Zealand.  13     The   girls'  
accounts of why their parents came to this country are simple:
their parents came to give their children the opportunities
supposedly provided by western schooling.   As Ruth put
it:     'My parents came here for us kids even before
we were born.   They came here to get us a good school, to
get us more chances than we 'd get back home'.      
    Pakeha historians put it differently.   During the
post-war economic growth period, New Zealand governments
followed the usual pattern of western capitalist societies
such as those in Western Europe and the United States.
  They recruited migrant workers to fill labour shortages
created by the increased investment in production after the
war.   The expansion of the service and industrial sectors
of the economy attracted Pakeha urban labour out of the
relatively undesirable and low-wage jobs in other sectors of
the economy, such as production-line work.   To fill the
gaps, employers turned to other sources of labour.   One
source was the largely rural Maori population&semi; another was
provided by labour from the Pacific Islands.  14    
    To fill white-collar jobs, other immigrants were
encouraged from countries such as Britain&semi; my own English
parents were amongst these immigrants to the middle class in
the 1950s - my father worked here as an accountant and, before
the children were born, my mother was a bank clerk.   For
them, migration was a chance to capitalise on the education
won through scholarships in England in the 'good' jobs
available in a 'growing' country.  
    Such patterns of recruitment continued to cement in
the ethnic - and racist - contours of class division in New
Zealand: the last few decades have seen the establishment of
an urban Maori and Pacific Islands population which is
predominantly in the unskilled and semi-skilled sections of
the working class.   In employment terms, like Blacks in
Britain and the United State 's, Maori and Pacific Islands
Polynesians in New Zealand are disproportionately
represented in the production/service transport/labour
sector of the workforce, and extremely under-represented in
professional and managerial, clerical and sales positions
dominated by Pakeha.   In New Zealand according to the 1986
Census, 63% of the full-time Pacific Islands work force are
employed in the production, service, transport and labouring
categories, compared with 33% of total work force.  
    Not surprisingly then, the 5 Mason   girls'  
mothers and fathers are mostly employed in local production&semi;
their mothers doing machining, packing, assembling and other
production-line work, or laundry and cleaning work.   Many
of these women also have part-time or shift work - like Lisa 's
mother, who works at night as a cleaner and during the day as
a factory worker in order to both provide money for the
household as well as to look after the children.  
    The form of work experienced by the 5 Mason
  girls'   parents is characterised by requiring
little schooling and few skills, and offering low pay and
little job security.   Jobs within this section of the
labour market are typically highly controlled,  'dead end' jobs
with no career structure and little prospect of increase in
wages with experience.  
    In a stagnant economy such as at present, the fact
that Pacific Islanders are employed largely within a
subordinate section of the labour market has several
implications for the 5 Mason girls, quite aside from the issue
of schooling.   While their future forms of work may not be
exactly the same as their mothers, it seems likely that these
girls will also be employed in work which has a low demand for
skills and educational qualifications with accompanying low
pay rates, low status, little autonomy, and poor career
prospects.  
    All this is assuming that the 5 Mason girls will be
able to get paid employment.   With the economy in
recession, at the beginning of the 1980s Pacific Islands
females had an official unemployment rate of 14.5%
compared with 9.0% for non-Polynesian females.   Amongst
the 15-19 age group where unemployment is highest, the Pacific
Islands female rate was 28.4%.  15     This situation
continues.   According to the Royal Commission on Social
Policy (1988), for all ages the Pacific Islands unemployment
rates are two to three times the national average, and rates
for young Pacific Islands Polynesians are five to six
times higher than the national average.   Racism, and not
just class division, plays a role in ensuring that Pacific
Islanders remain in particular forms of work, or unemployed.
  Evidence of this is amassed daily in the Race Relations
Conciliator 's office&semi; and researchers, posing as qualified
Pacific Islands job applicants, have documented some Auckland
  employers'   discrimination against them on the
basis of race.  16    
    Clearly, this situation is not in the interests of the
Pacific Islands girls in 5 Mason.  
    The twelve Pakeha girls in 5 Simmonds exist within a
very different set of economic and social conditions.   All
of them had immigrant parents or grandparents from Britain or
Europe - some families had been here several generations.
  Their parents - particularly their fathers - are now in
professional, administrative or entrepreneurial
occupations (such as engineering, business management,
teaching).   Some of their mothers are housewives, others
are teachers, nurses, clerical workers.   Due largely to
their   fathers'   occupations, but also because of their
standard of housing, their   parents'   education level,
their level of consumption, these   girls'   families
would be popularly characterised as middle class.  
    Many of the 5 Simmonds girls travel to school each day
from out of the school zone.   Some of their mothers had
been pupils at the school&semi; they are attracted by the school 's
traditionally high academic reputation, and many are keen on
their daughters having a single-sex and multicultural school
'experience'.   In the (diminishing) heterogeneity of
the fashionable inner city suburbs around the school, some of
the 5 Simmonds and 5 Mason   girls'   families live next
door to one another, though under differing material
conditions.  
        'Naming' the girls      
    I have begun to name these girls.   Not simply in
terms of the school 's division into classes on the basis of
expectations of academic  'success', but also as   Pacific
Islands   and   Pakeha  , and   working class  
and   middle class  .  
    These terms are those from everyday life in New
Zealand.   But they are not uncontentious.   My vocabulary
inevitably marks me out as having a certain view - as I said
before, through naming the world we construct it in a
particular way.  
    Writer Albert Wendt pointed out a few years ago that
only in New Zealand is he called Pacific Islander, elsewhere
he is a Samoan.   Pacific Islander has become a local
blanket term for migrants from the southern Pacific&semi; it is a
term which illicitly conceals the historical, cultural,
political and language differences between the separate island
groups.   Thus it has real dangers.   But it also offers a
possibility - a unified identity for political struggle made
difficult for smaller groupings in New Zealand.   My use of
the term ensures my categorisation of the girls as a group&semi;
they too use this word to name themselves - in a way, it
speaks of their own new identities as they use the dominant
common language English, and interact easily together.  
    The term Pakeha, rather than the usual 'European', is
also used selfconsciously here.   I use Pakeha as a
positive cultural and political name.   Let me explain this
briefly by referring to myself.   I am Pakeha despite my
  parents'   birthplace, I am not English.   I am
culturally of this place in the South Pacific.   My accent,
aspects of my personality, my emotional ties to the land, my
knowledge - and those of my children - are rooted here.
  But nor am I simply 'a New Zealander' along with every
other person in this country&semi; that term 's meaning is too
diffuse, and so all-encompassing as to only meaningfully
refer to a physical location.   Rather, my culture and
identity are deeply influenced by that of the indigenous
inhabitants, and indeed, established in relation to them: were
Maori never here, I would not be Pakeha, and vice versa - we
are named in relation to each other: Maori - 'common' or
ordinary person&semi; Pakeha - (fair) stranger, or perhaps 'other'.
  Were I an inhabitant of the other Pacific Islands I would
be named   palangi/palagi/papa'a  .  
    Thus, here I refer to the European girls in 5 Simmonds
as Pakeha in positive recognition of their cultural location
in the Pacific.   What might count as these   girls'  
culture will become more important later on.  
    I have also named the girls in terms of class.
  Race and class are usually inextricably linked&semi; in New
Zealand it is clear that to be Polynesian - whether indigenous
Maori or Pacific Islands - is usually to be working class.
  Some New Zealanders reject altogether the relevance of
class for an understanding of this society.   They still
look to Britain, and because (they think) we do not have the
very obvious social class differences evident in the accents
and lifestyles of the English, assume that classes do not
exist here.  
    However, most would agree that in the sense of
difference based on access to wealth, power and status, there
are social classes in New Zealand.   They would accept that
some groups benefit more than others from the organisation of
work and the economy.   These days, in common usage at
least, class pays little homage to the old Marxist definitions
where 'working class' refers to those who engage in productive
work (producing goods and providing services) which in
capitalism is controlled by, and largely benefits, others&semi;
where middle class refers to those engaged in maintaining,
organising, legitimating (and benefiting from) the conditions
of capitalist production - in the  'middle', as it were,
between the 'productive' workers and the owners (the major
beneficiaries) of international capital.  
    Most commonly, class refers vaguely - and often
    perjoratively    pejoratively     - to
lifestyles and attitudes, and maybe to people 's form of work.
  You 're working class if you are employed in work which is
usually relatively undesirable, probably boring, often poorly
paid.   You are often Maori or Pacific Islands.   You 're
working class if you can't afford a holiday, health food,
insurance or dentists&semi; if you own a video but not a going car.
  You 're middle class if you 're yuppie, privileged, you
(rather guiltily) own a three-bedroomed house for four people
while in the next suburb six people live in one room, in a
garage or worse.   You 're environment and health-food
'conscious', and concerned about social inequality.   You
are usually Pakeha.   You have good job conditions and
good pay and all that goes with those.  
    While this sort of idea of class might seem rather
silly and inaccurate, and to owe nothing to Marx, it
nevertheless reflects a general sense of the structure of the
social and economic relations of work in capitalism: it is an
expression of the privilege, and power, of some sections of
the labour force.  
    Social scientists usually avoid referring to class
altogether by using instead the term socio-economic status
(SES) and dividing the population into occupational categories
or SES groups ranked in terms of the occupation 's perceived
social status, pay and educational level.   A problem with
this sort of categorisation is that it tends to group together
people (such as housewives and unemployed) who have very
different conditions of life&semi; it tells us nothing about how
the economy works at the level of society, nothing about which
groups benefit from the organisation of the economy.  
    But I am not interested here in discussing 'class' in
the abstract.   I want to explore the ways in which class in
New Zealand 'works', how it becomes significant in schooling.
  In this sense, class can be understood through its ongoing
operation in the classroom.  
    By naming the girls in terms of class here I have made
central a particular idea: that a key to their differential
schooling might be found in the forms of work (paid and
unpaid) performed by their parents, and potentially to be
performed by the girls.   Without unpacking this idea too
much, because it will engage us in detail further on, I will
signal the direction of my thinking from my notes, introducing
a strand of the argument to be taken up and woven in with
several others.  
            What aspect of class is really
useful in looking at how teaching and learning works for
certain groups in the classroom?   It is not just the fancy
computers, clothes, holidays, books or the desk space at home
of some groups compared with others.   One thing which
characterises middle-class work (paid or unpaid) is the degree
of control over what counts as socially valued knowledge.
  Most people think about control over capital such as money
or property when they think about the privilege of
middle-class people.   But capital can also be symbolic.
  Having those skills, social traits, know-how which are
made valuable in the operation of the dominant scientific,
management, technological and artistic enterprises in New
Zealand is a form of capital.   So is 'ownership' of what
counts as the dominant culture: those values, norms, ways of
acting, thinking, speaking which are generally considered
to be 'competent' or admirable.   In other words, having
socially valued traits or knowledge - and the ability to
transmit these (say to one 's family) - can be seen as just as
much an aspect of the privilege or the power of certain
classes as the ability to directly transmit money or property.
  This is because the acquisition and use of symbolic or
cultural capital is an intrinsic part of the process of
maintaining economic and social
privilege.        
    How does schooling come into this?   The school - as
well as the family - can be seen as an important agent in this
acquisition.   Indeed, the transmission and exercise of
cultural capital can be seen as central to understanding
schooling.   From this point of view, it might be expected
that the 5 Simmonds girls, as members of that class (and
ethnic) group which 'controls' what counts as valuable
knowledge and culture in schooling and other social
institutions, would be enabled through the school to use and
acquire the skills, beliefs, expectations, knowledge and
qualifications (the cultural capital) which will provide them
with access to  'middle-class' jobs.   We might expect that
the school does not (can not?) enable this for the Pacific
Islands girls.   The question is, of course, how is this
happening in the classroom right now?   (It is worth
pointing out here that what counts as cultural capital is
usually understood in the terms of the dominant society.
  Some of the 5 Mason   girls'   fathers and mothers
hold highly knowledgeable and powerful positions within their
own social and church structures.   In these contexts, such
women and men would be considered to have a great degree of
cultural capital.   But within the economic and social
structures of the dominant society this capital usually has
less value.)  
    If all these abstractions seem difficult to grasp, it
is probably because they don't make a huge amount of sense
outside an account of how cultural capital, just like class,
'works' in a concrete site like the classroom.   That will
be my task in the following chapters.   In the meantime, I
sit in the classroom, and these thoughts are in my head as I
read and think, and read some more in order to frame and make
sense of the   girls'   everyday activities at school.  
    I suspect that the direction of my thinking does not
gel with that of the Pacific Islands girls in 5 Mason.
  Some ask: Why focus on 'the economic side of things'?
  One could focus on spiritual fulfilment or personal
happiness instead - why are economic conditions so important?
  I confront this question early on, because most of the
Pacific Islands girls consider that one 's spiritual happiness,
or at least one 's goodness, is 'the most important thing in
life'.   Doing God 's work, following His word, are
ultimately of far higher value than getting good
qualifications and a good job.   All the better when both
things can be done at once: working hard to do well at school
is doing God 's work - and laziness (a reason for school
failure) is not.   And anyway, as Repeka put it, God didn't
intend for everyone to be brainy, He needs some people to do
the  'stink' jobs.  
    If I were a fundamentalist Christian, the focus of my
research might well be about the achievement of goodness and
divinely-ordered happiness, possible even in poorly paid,
boring jobs.   But my interests are different.   I agree
with Marx that our work makes us human, and that material
conditions shape our consciousness as well as the texture of
our everyday lives.   A decent income and interesting or
fulfilling work determine the basic contours of our lives
within contemporary New Zealand: the comfort of our housing,
the state of our health, the stress on our family
relationships, the ease of transport, the variety of our food,
the level of our leisure consumption, the extent to which we
can support children and other family members, our feeling of
autonomy and general wellbeing.   Hence my concern with the
economic.  
        Class and gender      
    In attempting to clarify things, I have perhaps
oversimplified.   I have glossed over the fact that many of
the middle-class   girls'   mothers do not have jobs with
the degree of autonomy and financial reward which I have said
characterises middle-class work.   I seem to have used the
  girls'     fathers'   occupations as a measure of
their class membership - which is hardly reasonable when it is
young women 's life trajectories I am interested in.   Many
feminists would argue that the 5 Mason and 5 Simmonds girls
are not so easily divided into two class groups: that they
have more in common than is being expressed here - as women
the conditions of their work and lives may not be too
dissimilar in the future.  
    Some feminist researchers  17   have argued that
regardless of their ethnicity or their husband 's or father 's
social class, women are massively over-represented in
unpaid domestic work (housewives) and, compared with men as a
group, are disproportionately in paid work which have a higher
degree of job insecurity, low economic return, little
responsibility and limited chances for advancement which are
the characteristics of 'working class' jobs.   Women as a
group are usually found in a narrow range of occupations such
as cleaning, catering, teaching children, clothing-machining,
nursing, shop assistants and office work.   This work is
seen as 'women 's work' because it reflects the tasks which
women do in the home and consequently it suffers from low
status and wages.  
    Other feminists (like Madeline MacDonald) point out
that there are major divisions between working-class and
middle-class women in terms of their control over cultural
capital.   By definition working-class women (and men) have
little or no ownership of cultural capital.   On the other
hand, employed middle-class women and men produce, legitimise
and maintain the existing culture through their positions in
'cultural', media, educational, social service, and
administrative areas of work.   Middle-class women who
perform domestic work in the home and play a major role in
child-rearing also engage in transmitting to their children
valuable cultural or symbolic capital.  
    Obviously we cannot complete any proper analysis of
  girls'   schooling and labour market experience without
recognising that gender relations have a crucial effect on the
sorts of employment sought by and available to women in New
Zealand - including the 5 Mason and 5 Simmonds girls.   But
nor can we simply gloss over the major differences between
these   girls'   economic and social opportunities.  
    By way of illustrating these complexities let us look
briefly at the future experience of two girls: Martha (a young
working-class Pacific Islands Polynesian from 5 Mason) and
Sue (a young middle-class Pakeha from 5 Simmonds), who
initially got similar sorts of jobs on leaving school.  
    Martha lives in an older part of the inner city&semi; her
mother is a process worker and her father is employed as an
assembler.   Martha left   Girls'   High after four and
a half   years'   secondary schooling with one School
Certificate subject.   She didn't particularly want to leave
school, but said she couldn't  'stay for ever', and besides,
she wanted to earn some money.   She got a job in a local
fast-food bar, and left after three weeks because she 'hated'
the work.   She then worked temporarily as a shop assistant
selling light-fittings - all she could get.   She was
unemployed for three months, then got a job selling shoes in a
more distant suburban shopping centre.   Transport problems
led her to leaving that job after six weeks.   She then got
a job with a small local firm as a 'girl Friday' - filing,
taking phone messages, making tea.   She stayed in that job
for eighteen months, then became pregnant, left the wage
labour force, and married her boyfriend, a colour-mixer at a
paint factory in a distant industrial area.  
    Sue 's mother is a drama teacher and her father is an
architect&semi; they live in an expensive inner-city suburb.
  Sue is well known at school for her unconventional
hairstyles.   She left   Girls'   High after four years,
with University Entrance.   She was bored with school and
wanted to travel overseas so decided to earn some money.
  She got a job through a friend in a fashionable city
record shop.   After working there nearly two years, as well
as doing a part-time waitressing job, she left for Britain.
  She returned after about two years and worked briefly in
the record shop again.   She then enrolled at University and
took a part-time job delivering health food products to retail
outlets.   She graduated from university with a B.A. in
English and Art History and then became pregnant.   Her de
facto husband is a television journalist.  
    The conditions of both young women 's waged work
until their first pregnancy were similar: their service jobs
included little opportunities for advancement, poor pay and
low autonomy.   Nevertheless, Sue and Martha 's respective
access to money, further education, housing and employment in
the future will be quite different.   Through the use of her
educational credentials and other symbolic capital, Sue 's
future conditions of paid work (or domestic work) offer her
far more possibilities than those facing Martha.  
    This class pattern is even more evident in the
collective differences between the experiences of the majority
of the 5 Simmonds and 5 Mason girls.   Martha 's experiences
reflect those of many 5 Mason girls in that they often left
school with few qualifications and got jobs they were not
particularly interested in (see Chapter 8).   Sue, on the
other hand, is quite unusual compared with her classmates.
  Most 5 Simmonds girls in fact stayed on at school, heading
for tertiary study at university.   They hoped to become
doctors, teachers, architects.  
    Of course, the sexual division of labour may ensure
that the 5 Simmonds   girls'   more 'ambitious' hopes are
never realised.   Insofar as Martha and Sue - and
working-class and middle-class women in general - are often
limited to a particular segment of the labour market and
domestic work, they share an interest in the destruction of
the sexual division of labour and the gender relations which
tend to relegate women within all classes to subordinate
positions in relation to men in that class, and which make
women vulnerable to male violence and control.   But despite
the fact that all the girls would benefit from a non-sexist
society, the commonality of their interests is limited by
economic class.  18    
    This book is an attempt to spell out some of the ways
in which schools might contribute to maintaining those class
patterns experienced by Sue and Martha, and their
peers.      
  

          Maori   and   Pakeha  
Updated: Cultural Sensitivity and the   Heinemann New
Zealand Dictionary      
  TONY DEVERSON
    This paper examines the differences between the
entries for   Maori   and   Pakeha   in the first
and second editions of the   Heinemann New Zealand
Dictionary   (  HNZD1   and   HNZD2  ).
  These entries, reproduced below, raise some interesting
matters of lexicographical practice, and also some of the more
sensitive issues relating to New Zealand English (NZE) at the
present time - and especially the accommodation and use of
Maori loanwords in NZE.    
    All English teachers will know of the   HNZD  ,
and its pioneering status as the first such local work.
  Indeed it is still the only genuine New Zealand-produced
dictionary, since other dictionaries with New Zealand content
are either British or Australian based (  The New Zealand
Pocket Oxford Dictionary   or   The Penguin Tasman
Dictionary  , for example).   A second, substantially
revised edition of the   HNZD   was published late last
year, ten years after the first.   The first edition had
enormous novelty value, and it had many admirers, though it
was never going to displace the   Concise Oxford   as
the preferred reference work for English practitioners.   It
still won't do that, especially now that the   Concise  
is out in a brand new and rather awesome eighth edition
(1990), but the second edition of   HNZD   should be
taken much more seriously than the first&semi; it is a
significantly improved work, and one of a number of reasons
for this is the expansion of its New Zealand content and in
particular the Maori-derived vocabulary in NZE.   There are
very many more Maori loanwords listed, and the treatment of
some of the basic items (like the term   kiwi  ) is now
much more convincing and comprehensive.  
    The focus here is on the entries for just two words,
  Maori   and   Pakeha  , but they are two crucial
words which resonate with all kinds of intercultural and
personal associations: they are both at times 'loaded' and
controversial items.   As key terms in the lives of all New
Zealanders, they certainly present a challenge to any
lexicographer 's skills, not to say nerve.  
    It 's clear that both entries have been completely
recast for the 1989 edition.   The substantial changes
suggest a fairly profound dissatisfaction on the part of the
dictionary-makers with the original efforts when they came to
revise them.   Very little indeed remains from the earlier
versions&semi; little more than the part of speech labels, and in
the   Maori   entry a few capitalised words such as
'Polynesian'.   The first thing that one notices is that the
  Maori   entry is now much longer, and it 's made so
mostly through an extended treatment of the word as an
attributive adjective&semi; this usage is merely stated, with no
elaboration, in the first edition.  
    What then are the reasons for this near-total
rewriting?   It 's plainly not the case that the referents
denoted by the words have changed, so the motivation for
changing the entries must lie elsewhere.   It appears there
are two principal impulses behind the changes under
discussion.   We might call these the   scientific  
and the   humanist   respectively, and rather
predictably there is at times a tension, even a conflict,
between them.   They don't always go harmoniously hand in
hand.   The scientific impulse is the wish to make the
entries more accurate, more informative, and of sufficient
substance to mark the   words'   high profile in our
vocabularies (more complete in other words).   Apart from
the new material on the adjectival   Maori   already
noted (more of which below), another example of this intention
can be seen at the ends of the 1989 entries in the etymologies
provided.  
    In place of no etymology (for   Maori  ) or just
the name of the donor language   (for Pakeha)   before,
we now have in both instances the language, the
typographically exact modern Maori form of the source word
(complete with macrons for vowel length as recommended by the
Maori Language Commission), and in the case of   Maori  
grammatical and semantic information about the word
  Maori   in Maori.   Thus   Maori   comes from
  Maori   in Maori&semi; we know that - and a good deal else
in the dictionary - informally already, but the lexicographer
makes it quite precise.  
    But what I 've called the   humanist   motive
behind the changes may be the more interesting of the two.
  What I mean by this is the wish to reflect enlightened
social attitudes and practices (and changing attitudes), and
above all to respect cultural sensitivities when it comes to
the adoption of Maori words for English purposes.   It 's
possible this impulse has operated less consciously than the
other, but it is certainly at work here (and more strongly
felt in the second than in the first edition).   From the
Pakeha lexicographer 's viewpoint it 's a matter of adopting a
bicultural view, and of making every effort to avoid the
offence that Maori can be expected to take (and understandably
so) at anything they perceive to be disrespectful treatment of
or reference to te reo Maori.   It is appropriate to say (in
the spirit of 1990) that in effect this is a matter of
acknowledging the Treaty of Waitangi in the writing of
dictionary entries, of being true to the Treaty 's statements
of equal partnership and status.  
    As an example of this influence one can look first at
the whole entry for   Maori   in the first edition.
  Ten years ago many of us would have looked at that entry
and not turned a single hair.   But now, surely, there is
something profoundly disturbing about having   'as
cunning as a Maori dog'   cited as the sole example of
usage of the word   Maori  .   Even visually
(typographically) the bold-type   cunning   in the
midst of a triple bold-type   Maori   makes an
unfortunate connection.   It is not difficult to see how
this might be interpreted as giving not just the Maori dog but
the Maori themselves a bad name.   And it is scarcely
surprising then that the idiom in question has vanished
altogether from the dictionary (though certainly not from the
language) ten years later.  
    In the first edition the entry for   Maori  
itself is followed by separate entries for nine compounds in
which Maori is used as premodifying adjective:   Maori
Battalion, Maori oven  , etc.   Among these there is just
one,   Maori P.T.  , which illustrates the derogatory
meaning these formations sometimes have, where an unfavourable
racial stereotype is presented through an ironic or
paradoxical coinage.     Maori   in such compounds in
effect means 'the opposite of' or 'an unusual type of'
something (  Maori P.T.   is unenergetic behaviour,
loafing around,   a Maori sidestep   in rugby is a
head-on charge,   Maori overdrive   is coasting downhill
in neutral, and so on).   But there is just one example of
this quite productive process in   HNZD1   (it 's marked
  offensive  ), and there is no acknowledgement of it in
the main entry.  
    By contrast in 1989 there   is   recognition of
this ironic usage, but its impact is considerably softened,
and the derogatoriness downplayed, by enclosing it in a more
comprehensive treatment of adjectival expressions.   To some
extent, it 's 'buried in the fine print'.   Three of these
adjectival uses are entirely uncontroversial (and informative)
(1a, 2a, 2b), while the other one is not defined (1b), merely
glossed as possibly derogatory or stereotypical.  
    Returning for a moment to the entries following the
main one, instead of nine in   HNZD1  , there are now as
many as thirty-six in   HNZD2  , but if one is looking
for more of the   Maori P.T.   type one looks in vain.
  Furthermore   Maori P.T.   has been removed from the
earlier list (all the others remain), and the only item among
the additional twenty-eight entries that exemplifies the same
usage and is marked offensive, is   Maori cannon  , and
that is the one used as example in 1b in the main entry.
  So there is still just one example, but a different one.
  What then is a Maori cannon?   It 's a term not from the
field of war, but from the field of billiards.   A cannon in
billiards is a double hit, and a   Maori cannon   is
defined as   'a blunder at billiards'   (or
pool?).   Scarcely familiar territory for the average
Heinemann dictionary user, one might say, and there is a
suggestion that   Maori cannon   has been deliberately
selected ahead of one or more potentially more emotive
examples of this usage that clearly embody the racist
stereotype.  
    The cautious but sensitive Heinemann treatment of this
usage contrasts strikingly with David McGill 's less inhibited
approach in his two recent collections of New Zealand slang
(  A Dictionary of New Zealand Slang   1988,   The
Dinkum Kiwi Dictionary   1989).   McGill 's is a narrower
province, and it 's mostly the derogatory formation rather than
the neutral   Maori oven   type that comes under his
heading of slang.   So there are several such expressions in
each book carefully annotated as   offensive  , even
  doubly offensive  , but paraded there nevertheless for
entertainment in full view of those who might take the
offence.   (Although many readers may find a large part of
the contents of these books offensive for one reason or
another, the label   offensive   in McGill is a
privilege reserved solely for these expressions,   Maori
roast   and the like).  
    There appear to be two contradictory trends in the
changes that have to do with the adjectival   Maori   in
the   HNZD  .   The scientific concern for
informativeness and thoroughness is represented by the
additional content in the main entry and the large number of
extra compounds now listed after it.   However, the humanist
concern not to provoke offence results first in the omission
of a clear definition of the derogatory use of   Maori  
as an adjective, and then in the illustration of it both in
the main entry and the following compounds by a single,
esoteric and relatively uncontroversial (and rather
unrepresentative) item.   The following compounds are
selected to the virtual exclusion of one of the four
subcategories of adjectival usage specified, and yet that one
is surely no less a part of NZE than the other three.
  Indeed, it could be argued that these derogatory items are
in more need of inclusion than something like   Maori
celery  , say, or   Maori jasmine  , because their
meaning, being ironic, is not transparent.   It 's difficult
to escape the conclusion that there 's a suppression of
vocabulary going on here, well motivated certainly, but
bringing the scholarly, scientific aims of lexicography into
conflict with more humane motives.   A degree of
explicitness and comprehensiveness is sacrificed to avoid
alienating some New Zealanders.  
    There are a number of other notable changes in these
entries between the first and second editions.   One element
in the entries is the indication of pronunciation.   The
pronunciation of Maori words in NZE has been an emotive issue
for at least a hundred years, and this is another area in
which the lexicographer must tread carefully.   In the case
of   Maori  , the change between the 1979 and 1989
entries is only apparent, the second edition uses a different
key for Maori pronunciation (to be found in the 'grey pages'
at the back of the book), and the indicated and in effect
recommended pronunciation is the same as before.   Both
editions have therefore advocated a formal, Maori-style
pronunciation&semi; the only quarrel one might have with this is
that since more fully Anglicised pronunciations are given as
alternatives for some other common Maori loanwords (such as
  kowhai  ) there is an inconsistency in the treatment
of Maori, for which there is a long-standing Anglicised form
in Pakeha speech.   Again it is, one assumes, the special
importance of the word that motivates the more prescriptive
and diplomatic stance here.   For   Pakeha  ,  the
second edition   does   provide
    and    an     Anglicised form (with /h/
elided), in addition to the Maori-style pronunciation that
stood alone in the first edition.   Thoroughness here seems
to enjoy a minor victory over humanist motives, but
  '  par  kee-are'   is certainly not as
commonly heard as Anglicised forms of   Maori.    
    Another change in the 1989 entry for   Pakeha  
is the capitalisation of the word.   This reflects changing
practice, but upper case is still not universally favoured (as
readers of   The Press   in Christchurch will be aware),
and so there 's an element of mild prescription again: upper
case is the preferred usage of biculturalist opinion.   For
comparison the   New Zealand Pocket Oxford   gives both
forms, lower case first, while the new   Concise  
continues to list the word only in lower case (though
  '(NZ) white man'   of the seventh edition has
thankfully become   'white person, as opposed to a
Maori'   in the eighth).  
    Another addition to the   Maori   entry in
  HNZD2   is the grammatical information regarding
plural use.   This is another rather sensitive issue,
analogous to the pronunciation of Maori loanwords&semi; that is,
the question is, to Anglicise (by inflexion) or not to
Anglicise (leaving the plural uninflected as in the donor
language).     HNZD2   hedges its bets here and gives
both possibilities, but practice in this matter has changed
very rapidly in the last year or two, and the
dictionary-makers may already be wishing they had at least put
the uninflected plural first, since that has established
itself as the politically correct form in the media and
elsewhere.   Last year the   journalists'   union
decided that   Maori   was the only plural to be used by
its members, and whether because of the effects of that
decision alone or not,   Maoris   (sic) already seems
improper and impolitic, rather as words like
  chairman   or   actress   are for different
reasons.   There is the same kind of socially responsible
linguistic engineering here as in the rejection of sexist
terminology, and it arouses the same kinds of reactionary
response from some.  
      What applies to   Maori   in terms of plural
formation, by implication applies to all nouns borrowed from
Maori (for example the plurals of   kauri   and
  kea   are   kauri   and   kea  ), and this
includes   Pakeha  , though there is no note on plural
forms provided here, or indeed with any other
    Moari    Maori     loanword in the dictionary.
    Maori   once again is the test case, and its
significance has been duly acknowledged in the revised
entry.  
    Finally, there is the semantic component, the
all-important definitions, always the central focus of
dictionary entries, and the main rationale for these
wordbooks.   The definitions of   Maori   and
  Pakeha   are considerably changed in the second
edition.   Discussion of the merits of the paraphrases given
in the two editions is not called for here, but one very
striking feature of the new   Maori   entry first, is
the use of   'tangata whenua'   in the main
definition.   This may go against the sound lexicographical
principle that you should not use in a definition any word
that is likely to be less familiar than the word you are
defining (though   tangata whenua   is now considerably
less unfamiliar in this country than ten or even five years
ago)&semi; however that principle becomes secondary here to the
evident wish to define   Maori   as far as possible from
a Maori perspective, using a precise Maori term (to which in
turn an English gloss is then added).   To my knowledge this
is the first time in an English dictionary that one Maori
loanword has been used directly to define another.
    HNZD2   shows appropriate consideration for Maori
in doing this&semi; it 's tactful, in tune with the times, and it
epitomises the best aspects of the changes under review
here.  
      Pakeha   is less easy than   Maori   to
define because its range of reference is not so precisely
delimited.   Are Pakeha New Zealanders only?   If not,
what other groups might the word refer to?   Are Pakeha just
New Zealanders of British or European extraction or not?
  These questions are difficult to answer.   The changes
in   HNZD2   include dropping from the 1979 entry the
obsolete sense 2 (wasn't such a person more usually called a
'Pakeha Maori'?), and removing the word 'European' from sense
1.   In the new edition   Pakeha   is defined as an
antonym of   Maori   (  'non-Maori'  ),
which makes the definition more New Zealand-oriented, and
above all more Maori-oriented.   Maori is the unmarked
category, and Pakeha becomes the marked, which is appropriate
to the historical development of this country.   Further on
there is a matching statement to the one in the
  Maori   entry concerning the possible offensive use of
the adjectival   Pakeha   by
  'non-Pakeha'  &semi; however there 's no illustration
of this.   'Non-Pakeha' we can only take to mean Maori: it 's
an antonym of (the more commonly heard) 'non-Maori'.   Both
'non-Pakeha' and 'non-Maori' (which might warrant their own
entries in the dictionary, but don't get them) are plainly
euphemistic in a well-intentioned sense, and yet another
instance of the   lexicographers'   sensitive approach to
their task of revision.  
    An overall verdict on the revision of these entries is
generally favourable, with just one or two reservations, for
example, over what might be thought a slight failure of nerve
in respect of demonstrating the pejorative adjectival use of
  Maori  .   Two concluding observations may be made.
  One is that while lexicographers fundamentally adopt a
scientific approach there are unavoidable limitations and
compromises involved in their work, both in terms of
constraints of space and time, and in terms of having only
words (which can be very blunt instruments) with which to
define and explain other words.   Lexicography is both an
inherently imperfect science, and a most difficult art.
  These revised entries do a better job of indicating the
sense and tone and usage of   Maori   and
  Pakeha   than the superseded ones, but they cannot be
regarded as the whole truth&semi; some of the nuances and
associations (and uses) inevitably still escape the scientific
net.   For more     defnitive    definitive    
entries yet, we can look forward to Harry Orsman 's
  Dictionary of New Zealand English  , compiled on
historical principles&semi; this has now been designated an
official 1990 project, and is due for publication in 1991.  
    The final observation is that dictionaries reflect
social changes not merely in updating the set of words which
they select for inclusion and description (so that
  HNZD2   like the new   Concise Oxford   has many
of the words of the 1980s like   perestroika   and
  user-friendly  )&semi; but dictionaries may (and in the
case of these two entries certainly do) also mirror social
trends and attitudes in the content and presentation of the
entries themselves.   Updating a dictionary means more than
just updating the list of words&semi; it also requires careful
attention to changes in the perceptions and connotations of
words, especially those of particular note at a given time.
  The revisers of the   HNZD   should be commended for
being responsive to the changing climate of race relations and
linguistic attitudes in Aotearoa/New Zealand in the 1980s, and
for changing the entries for   Maori   and
  Pakeha   accordingly in a careful and enlightened
manner.      
  

          5      
      Violence Away    
    Statistically, New Zealanders display very much the
same range of violent activities as any other Western
industrial society.   Homicide, assault, rape, vandalism,
arson, and other offences against the person and against
property are found everywhere.   Such acts are seen by the
public as a rising tide of lawlessness remorselessly pressing
against the thin barricades of law and order and the agencies
of control.   Is this an appropriate perception?  
    All of this gets due, and sometimes undue, attention
in the media and contributes to a sort of on-going industry.
  At each election, the law and order issue is hauled out,
dusted off and hawked around the countryside, usually
resulting in a promise of action.   The action which follows
usually consists of a committee or commission whose reports in
future will doubtless be greatly facilitated by the recycling
of previous reports through the word processor.   Between
elections, governments tinker with penalties and the
definition of offences, manipulate the numbers in the police
force and respond to the eruption of public outrage that often
follows a particularly dramatic criminal incident.   Why
some such incidents are responded to in this way and others
are ignored has a lot to do with the time of the year, the
marginality of the government 's majority, and who happens to
be pushing the bandwagon.   But whenever and why it starts
to move, its passage and progress are fairly predictable.
  Violence in our society is not random, it is patterned.
  And so, too, are our reactions to it.  
    The Department of Justice submission to the Committee
of Inquiry into violence in 1986 included information on all
the murders committed between 1950 and 1985   (49)  .
  While the number of murders fluctuates from year to year
(there were twenty-five in 1981 but only seven in 1982), there
has been a steady increase over the years.   The average
number of murders between 1960 and 1964 was six.   For the
five-year period twenty years later (1980-4), this had risen
to twenty-seven.   The annual figure starts to rise after
1975.   Other violent offences have also risen steadily.
  In 1985 there were eleven times as many violent offences
as in 1960.  
    Six per cent of the 202 murderers were female and 94
per cent male.   This ratio did not change over the period
of the study.   Sixty-one per cent of the murderers had
previous criminal records, but the proportion of murderers who
have histories of violent offending has increased in recent
years.   Of those who committed murder between 1960 and
1969, 23 per cent had convictions for violent offending,
compared with nearly half (48 per cent) of those who committed
murder between 1980 and 1985.  
    The educational level of murderers changed little over
the period of the study.   Only 10 per cent of murderers in
the 1980s had managed to progress beyond the third form,
compared to 4 per cent in the period between 1960 and 1969.
  The average age of murderers has changed little over the
decades, remaining at about twenty-nine&semi; the murderers in the
study ranged in age from fourteen to sixty-eight.  
    Another feature that has remained constant has been
the proportion of victims known to their murderers - about
three-quarters.   Nearly a third of the victims were family
members.   So far this report has revealed an extraordinary
sociological predictability in the background of
murderers.  
    Two factors have changed markedly over the years.
  One is the proportion of unemployed who feature in the
homicide statistics.   Until about 1970, only 16 per cent of
the murderers were out of work at the time of the murder but
the percentage has risen to 55 per cent in the 1980s.   Of
course over this decade unemployment increased dramatically in
the total population, so the change is in employment, not in
the nature of murder or murderers.   The second change
relates to the number of murderers who were Maori.   In the
first two decades of the study (1950-69), 23 per cent of
committed murderers were Maori, a figure which rose in the
1970s to 25 per cent and in the 1980s to 48 per cent.   The
label 'Maori' may be meaningless in this context, since we
know nothing of how culturally Maori these offenders are.
  Before anything can be concluded from these statistics
they need to be placed in the context of general social trends
such as unemployment, migration, and family breakdown.  
    In all this statistical information, it is difficult
to see anything unique about New Zealand homicides and
assaults.   They have increased in proportion to economic
hardship and social deprivation.   The government and the
public at large find it convenient to focus attention upon the
crime rates and the criminals because the social and economic
problems which lie behind them are so difficult to resolve.
  Yet by world standards, New Zealand cities and streets,
homes, and parks are safe places, even though they have become
less so in the last decade   (7)  .   And our
homicide rate of 2.2 per 100,000 of population is similar to
that of England (2.24), lower than that of Australia (2.73),
and much, much lower than that of the USA (9.60)
  (119)  .  
    Much of the increase in violent offending is
associated with crimes against property.   Property crime is
almost everywhere committed by the deprived against the
privileged.   Theft, burglary, and robbery are crimes of
gain.   Vandalism and arson are crimes of destruction.
  Car theft may have a range of motive reason: joy-riding,
lack of transport, bravado, sale or plunder, or simply the
desire to wreck.   If killing occurs in association with
these property crimes the context is very different from that
of intentional homicide.  
    However, crime statistics must be interpreted with
caution.   The use of percentages in isolation can imply an
exaggerated increase in low frequency crimes.   Different
ways of defining crimes or gathering statistics, and
differences in policing methods can affect reported crime
rates.  
    Newspaper headlines can contribute to public alarm.
  'Soaring Violence in Crime Concerns' (  Waikato
Times  , 25 August 1989) headlines an article which records
that although current crime had risen nationally by 7.5 per
cent, homicides had dropped by the same amount and seven
districts had actually reported drops in crime overall.
  Nevertheless, any increase in crime, however small,
provides an opportunity for a Police Association spokesperson
to lament the lack of police resources, and for Opposition
politicians to berate the government of the day for being
 'soft' on crime.  
    Rape has received a great deal of attention from the
public and from both political parties.   Rape is the only
crime where the victim is often as much on trial as the
accused and in which, because it is unlikely that there will
be independent witnesses, the prosecution will have difficulty
in securing a conviction.   In 1981 there were sixty-four
rape convictions&semi; this had risen to seventy-nine in 1985.
  However, in 1984 there were 381 complaints of rape, of
which the police decided to prosecute fewer than a third (29
per cent).   Of the 111 cases prosecuted, a conviction was
obtained in eighty cases (72 per cent), although this means
that only 21 per cent of the rapes initially reported to the
police resulted in a conviction   (224)  .
  Criminologist Warren Young has estimated that only 4 per
cent of rapes ever result in a prosecution   (259)  .
  Is it any wonder that victims of rape who initiate and
then suffer the ordeal of police and court procedures often
ask themselves if it was worth it?    
    A major symposium on rape was held in 1981
  (143)   and a two-volume study was issued in 1983 by
the Department of Justice   (48)  .   There are a
number of issues which lie behind this attention.   There
are serious problems within the criminal justice system in
dealing with evidence, the difficulty of conviction, and the
feminist view that the justice system, in this area, is far
from just.   Attitudes to sexuality have become more
liberal, which may also have led some men to believe they have
a greater right of sexual access to women.   Society has
become suddenly more liberal in respect of pornography, and
the depiction of male sexual violence has become quite
fashionable, even in G-rated movies, videos and TV
 'soaps'.  
    There has been a cost involved in 'taking the wraps
off' rape.   When it was a taboo subject, there was less
inducement to copy-cat crime.   Rape has become almost a
badge of membership in some groups in our society.  
    Rape is denied by both men and women.   Some men
still think, 'I bet she asked for it' or  'she probably
deserved it'.   Others distance themselves from the
perpetrator by claiming that no  'decent' man would ever do
such a thing.   There are women, too, who say,  'she must
have asked for it, walking at night like that.   I don't
walk at night alone therefore it won't happen to me'.   The
attitude that 'only sluts get raped' still prevails.  
    Of all the violent crimes, rape has generated the most
myths in popular folklore   (33, 224)  .   Contrary
to public belief, most rapes are not committed on the streets
at night by a stranger but at the home of either the victim or
the rapist by someone who is very often known to the victim
  (39)  .   Women do not get raped because they
flaunt their sexuality: victims can be any female - from
little girls to very old women.   Rapists are not always
either young men in the full flush of sexual desire or  'dirty
old men'.   They too cover the whole age range.  
    While less recent literature   (4)   suggests
that anger and hostility towards the woman victim, rather than
sexual lust, is an important motivation, modern perspectives
regard rape as an act of power, of domination
  (224)  .   Most rapists are not sexually deprived
but are either in regular sexual relationships or have licit
sex available to them if they seek it.   The purchase of sex
on the streets is available to all men.   But that is not
what the rapist is after.   There is also the myth that
rapists are sexually inadequate but this, too, is not the
case.   The sexually inadequate peep or flash or seek out
children   (14)  .  
    These myths are carried in the collective
consciousness of our society.   They are perpetrated through
literature, movies, and videos.   Especially pernicious is
the scenario where the woman resists sexual advances, is
raped, and enjoys the sexual encounter   (54, 189)  .
  This is a frequent theme in pornographic videos but in
milder form it pervades the popular media.   Even when the
censor cuts a scene, it just leaves a gap where the rape ought
to be.   Men who watch this kind of material internalise the
message that women really want sex and enjoy being raped, even
though they may initially say no.   Such messages give men
permission to rape.   Implicit rape scenes give vulnerable
men as much (or more) permission as overt depiction.   The
message that women wish to be violated to fulfil their sexual
desires must be banished for ever from popular culture.  
    Some minor changes to the law and improvement in
judicial practice have lessened the ordeal of the victim.
  Rape crisis centres provide support for both recent
victims, and those who were raped in the past and who have
long carried a secret burden.   Victim impact assessment is
now routine so that the court will have adequate evaluation of
the damage which has occurred.  
    A substantial study of rape victims was included in
the Department of Justice 's Rape Study in 1983.   In the
first volume, Warren Young discussed the law, court, and
judicial proceedings relating to rape   (259)  .
  While much can be done to protect the victim from the
distressing experience of legal proceedings, the basic problem
is the reluctance of victims to report at all.   Young
believed that changes in the law and practice would encourage
a higher level of reporting, but he acknowledged that rape
puts the victim in such an invidious social position that
legal changes are unlikely to have much effect.   Rather, he
put his trust in community education and the establishment of
comprehensive, readily available, and adequate victim support
services.  
    The victim must be given every protection from public
exposure, yet the public must be informed when rape has
occurred, and by whom.   It is almost impossible to punish
the perpetrator without further punishing the victim.   The
characteristics of rapists are so diverse that it is likewise
almost impossible to run educational and publicity campaigns
which do not deepen women 's mistrust of men in general.   It
is regrettable that half of the population must distrust the
other half because of the actions of a few.   This seems
unfair, and many worthy men may feel grossly offended.   It
is ironic that it is the non-rapist who must establish his
credentials.   But all men are capable of rape, and those
who reject that possibility are simply distancing themselves
from a major social problem caused by their own gender.
  This is not a cause which women must fight alone.  
    The second volume of the Department of Justice 's
report consisted of research studies.   The first described
an in-depth interview study of fifty women rape victims, four
of whom had been raped twice   (236)  .   The sample
was small and adventitious rather than systematic, and was
used by the authors largely to illustrate various topics and
themes, such as why some women report rape and some women do
not, the circumstances under which rape occurs, the
experiences which victims report of police procedures, and the
court process.   These fifty women also commented on the
sources and quality of support or help that they received.
  There is a special section on rape within marriage.  
    The recommendations from this study (and there were a
great many) were wide ranging.   This is understandable,
because the area of rape, as social policy, is deeply
perplexing.   The injury inflicted not only by the attack
but also by subsequent legal proceedings (if the rape is
reported at all) persists in memory and may deepen rather than
be resolved by time.   Because of this, we will never know
how many rapists go uncaught and unchallenged, or how much
damage they do to their victims.  
    The recommendations in the study emphasise that the
existence of rape must be frankly acknowledged and publicly
discussed.   They urge that the police employ women officers
and that only they should deal with the victim and in
circumstances that are more sensitive to the special nature of
sexual assault.   They call for judicial proceedings to be
reoriented and restructured to take account of the victim 's
special needs, and for support services to be universally
available and publicly funded.  
    The Justice Department Rape Study also contained a
report on rape complaints which revealed that most rape
complainants know the name of the rapist   (231)  .
  Even in gang rapes (one in five of all complaints) at
least one member of the gang was known to the victim.
  Contrary to popular belief, rapists do not often inflict
serious physical injury on the victim, but usually use force
such as grabbing and pushing and threats of physical injury or
injury to the woman 's reputation.  
    The information in this report is distressingly
familiar.   From the police records, there would appear to
be two kinds of rape.   In one, the victim is likely to be
young, unemployed, and attacked in a public place by a
stranger or someone she knows by name but only casually.
  The other, more frequent rape is by someone acquainted
with the victim.   The former feature more frequently in the
police records while the latter, overwhelmingly, predominate
in the records of rape crisis centres and support groups,
which show that rape victims cover a wide range of ages and
are most likely to be raped in their own home by someone they
know.  
    The complaint data show that the majority of
defendants (64 per cent) plead guilty.   In the year of the
study, there were twenty-seven rape defendants who proceeded
to a jury trial&semi; of these, thirteen were convicted of rape or
attempted rape.   The defence usually turns on one of two
issues: the allegation that consent was given and therefore
there was no rape, or that the accused was misidentified
  (231)  .  
    The police, it seems, loathe the whole business.
  They generally despise the rapists and have an embarrassed
but quite genuine desire to lessen the unpleasant nature of
the experience for the complainant.   The frequent
absence of any corroborative evidence makes this and child
sexual abuse peculiar issues in terms of court procedures.  
    These studies preceded the general legislative review
of 1986 when the definition of rape was changed to that of
sexual violation, a husband 's exemption from the charge of
rape was withdrawn, and a woman 's past sexual history could be
referred to only with the explicit permission of the presiding
judge.   Strengthening the role of rape crisis centres and
women 's refuges is clearly part of government intention, but
so far funding is still very limited.  
    Anti-rape education remains still at the discretion of
schools.   Despite the worthy efforts of voluntary groups,
we are still a long way from rearing a generation of men for
whom rape is an unthinkable act.   And for all progress that
we make, there is an unknown degree of counteraction caused by
the depiction of rape, near rape, or what might have been
rape, in videos, movies, and television.  
    In their submission to the Roper Committee of Inquiry
into Violence the police collected information on 100
prisoners convicted of rape and found a high correlation
between rape and general offending   (150)  .
  These 100 may be the worst the police could find&semi; their
rate of offending was an appalling average of 24.7 convictions
each.   Forty-three of this group were Pakeha, fifty-seven
were Polynesian, and twenty-six belonged to gangs most of
which were Maori.   Gang members committed an average of
30.7 offences each.   The police conclude that greater
police pressure will have to be placed on gang members, even
though such pressure would almost certainly increase
offending.   While much attention is given to the more lurid
incidents of gang rape, indecent assaults and individual rapes
by gang members, it is necessary to keep the issue of gang
membership in perspective.   Total gang membership
throughout the country is around 4,000, a rise from just over
2,000 in 1986.  
    The aim of gangs is not to wage war on society, even
though one might well gain that impression from the media.
  The major purpose of gangs is to provide affiliation and
support for their members.   They are a substitute for
family for individuals whose own families are unsatisfactory,
unsupportive, or simply non-existent.   Many gang members
already have extensive police records before they joined.
  The police submission to the ministerial inquiry into
violence gives powerful evidence of the disastrous background
factors in the lives of these multiple offenders, whose
records often begin in their early teens, probably after some
years of living outside parental control and supervision.
  Since no one cared, they may have grown up beyond moral
and social constraint, and feel they owe nothing to a society
that gave them nothing.   The gang may be their first
positive humanising social experience.   We need to remember
that gangs are not violent most of the time, and that the
violence arises for structural reasons and in critical
incidents.  
    The media tend to concentrate on the violent
activities of some gangs or gang members as though membership
is the cause of offending   (108)  .   Many of these
individuals would have pursued these kinds of activities
whether or not they were members of gangs.   All multiple
rape is not committed by gangs.   It occurred throughout
history long before modern gangs emerged.   It is a sad fact
of bad male behaviour in groups.   But there is no doubt
that the members of one particular gang have been associated
with homicide and severe brutalities in the past and also with
stand-over tactics to intimidate witnesses.   Many gang
houses maintain an arsenal of weapons of various kinds,
chiefly in order to defend themselves against other gangs.
  The endeavours of the Labour Department through the
contract work scheme and the employment of streetworkers
specifically to deal with group employment has gone a long way
to converting some of the gangs into skilled business
operators.   In some of these programmes examination has
revealed evidence of featherbedding, contract inflation, the
making use of every possible loophole and the taking advantage
of poor supervision, but nothing specifically criminal has
been revealed and that is not the general situation.  
      Gangs are frequently led by individuals with
plenty of intelligence but little formal education, who have a
sharp-edged underdog 's view of society and are perfectly
capable of finding dodgy ways of taking advantage of whatever
the system allows.   Techniques of intimidating government
grant officers are not novel.   Tom Wolfe vividly described
similar methods for obtaining funds from grant officers under
Lyndon Johnson 's 'great society' programme.   American
society learnt years ago that gangs develop respect for a
streetworker who is similar enough to themselves to be
able to work with them, to call their bluff and to direct them
away from socially disruptive and ultimately self-destructive
activity   (256)  .  
    Currently we have only the rudiments of such a
service, no effective training technique for group and
community workers, and therefore no way of offering
alternatives to the effective recruitment practices which
gangs operate both inside and outside the prison system.
  There is no doubt that gangs use the prison system to put
their own recruitment officers inside and to offer a more
effective bridge than the probation service for released
prisoners.   Your gang is more than your family&semi; it will
find you a lawyer if you are in trouble, give you money if you
need it, provide for your entertainment, accommodation, even
work should you want it.   The surprising thing is that
membership is only a few thousands.   It is equally
surprising that we have not learnt from the very techniques
that gangs employ, how better to provide for those who are
attracted to them.  
    For example, in some areas gangs have asked Maori
communities for permission to build gang premises on
papakainga (tribal land).   In the cases of which we are
aware, the kaumatua have not considered the marae to be the
best place for gang living.   There are thousands of
hectares of tough country where the challenge of living
communally and recreating the myth of a tribal past might be
made to work and some have tried.   But gangs are a product
of urban life-style, the wage economy and the dole or other
loose money in the system for those who would take advantage
of it.   Living rough in rural settings needs quite a
different set of survival skills.   If rural alternative
life-styles are an answer someone will have to show how new
skills will be learned and how people will be motivated to
acquire them.      
  

          2.2 Legislating for Outcomes      
    Government policies in support of unions may be seen
as having two primary objectives.   One is the creation of
 'democracy' in the workplace, whether this is seen as a means
of eventually breaking down capitalism, or as a means of
combatting the supposedly dehumanizing practices of
capitalism.   It is an objective of politicizing an economic
relationship.  
    The second objective is to assure certain outcomes for
workers in terms of remuneration and work conditions, by
countering the 'bargaining power' of the employer (or
employers as a class) with the 'bargaining power' of a
monopolistic union.   By conferring a degree of monopoly
power on unions by statute, the government effectively
delegates to unions its own power to  'set' outcomes in labour
market relationships&semi; unions, rather than the government or
its bureaucracies, are seen as the   'rational'  ,
  'articulate'   and   'wise'  
replacement for the   'uncontrolled'   processes
of the market.  
    The alternative, of course, is to legislate directly
for these outcomes.   And in practice, even where the powers
conferred on unions are extensive, as in New Zealand,
governments do take on a substantial role in attempting to set
pay and work conditions directly.   This role would seem to
indicate at least an implicit acceptance that unions are in
fact not a very good way of protecting the most vulnerable
members of the workforce&semi; their   forte   lies rather in
bolstering the position of the middling strong.   This is
made explicit in Dickman 's description of the agenda of union
leaders in the United States earlier this century - an agenda
combining support for pro-union legislation (syndicalism) and
direct intervention in outcomes (statism):
        For the unorganized and what they saw
as the unorganizable classes of labor (women and children),
many trade union leaders favored laws that would either
directly fix wage contracts (minimum wages) or remove the
contractors from the market entirely (abolition of child
labor, immigration restriction).   But for organized or
easily organizable workers, their agenda was more syndicalist
and less statist - an approach which one scholar has aptly
summarized in another context as a policy of having the
government become 'the ally of the labor organizations against
the employer, supplying the power' to override individual
rights, but 'not dictating to what ends it shall be
used'.     (1987, pp. 224-5)    
    Similarly in New Zealand legislated minimum conditions
are seen as underpinning the award system, and becoming more
significant with any weakening of that system:
        A national Minimum Wage, set at a
realistic level, would underpin the award system.   It would
provide a level below which awards could not fall and a moral
incentive for the parties to award negotiations to settle
above the statutory minimum.     (Brosnan and
Wilkinson, 1989, p. 16)    
    Union support for direct intervention to fix outcomes
for the 'unorganizable' was and is not, of course, a matter of
pure altruism.   Intervention to set a floor on wages or
conditions reduces the ability of workers outside unions to
compete with union members for jobs, for example, by providing
an incentive for employers to change the nature of production
or their entire business to substitute workers outside a
unionized occupational category for workers inside that
category.   Thus wage restrictions in South Africa have been
an important means of protecting white workers from
competition by blacks.  8     Intervention to limit
market entry altogether is an even more sure way of limiting
competition and bolstering union power.   This was arguably
a motive behind the Factory Acts in England (that limited the
employment of women at a time when factory conditions were
becoming less, not more, arduous),  9   and behind shop
trading hours legislation in New Zealand.  10   
  More recently, it has surfaced as an explanation of the
support given by relatively wealthy members of the European
Community to harmonization of labour legislation covering
everything from codetermination to comparable worth:
        In some member-states ... an argument
has surfaced and received a good deal of sympathy that without
a strong social action programme the wealthier countries in
the Community will suffer from social dumping, namely, that
Greece, Spain and Portugal, and in the future possibly Turkey,
which have lower labour and social costs, will enjoy an
advantage under the [Single European Act].   In other words,
unless the comparative cost advantages of these countries are
harmonised by a common level of social costs they will gain at
the expense of the more industrially advanced countries.
  This is a classic protectionist argument ....    
(Roberts, 1989, p. 45)    
    On the other hand, the extension of government
involvement in legislating for outcomes also serves to weaken
the case for supporting collective bargaining in an era in
which the notion of a fundamental capital-labour struggle -
and hence the 'need' to politicize the employment relationship
- is losing its edge.   As unions are increasingly justified
in terms of the economic benefits that they can win for
workers, their position could be argued to be weakened by
direct legislation for such 'benefits'.   The regulations
that they have nurtured have, by their coverage of workers
irrespective of union membership, reduced the incentives for
membership, and thus the dominance of collective
bargaining.  
    There has been a strong belief within the union
movement in New Zealand that there are certain things that
should not be negotiable, regardless of the power of unions to
negotiate for them.   These take on the character of
'inalienable' rights of workers, unionized or non-unionized,
and they range widely.   There is a 'right' to a forty-hour
week, a 'right' to strike and a (more ambiguous) 'right'
against 'unjust' dismissal, for example.   Similarly there
is a notion that occupational health and safety should not
even be seen as an 'industrial' issue (that is, as an integral
part of the employment relationship), and that related work
conditions should be non-negotiable.  
    Minimum wage law is perhaps the most significant means
of directly regulating the outcomes of employment
relationships.   New Zealand has had a statutory minimum
wage since 1942, introduced to 'protect' the wages of workers
directed to essential industries because of wartime
conditions.   A Minimum Wages Act was passed in 1945.
  Since 1948 it has not been necessary to amend the Act to
adjust the minimum upwards&semi; this is achieved instead by an
Order-in-Council.   The relative value of the minimum wage
has fluctuated considerably over time.   In 1948 it was 78%
of the average wage.   It fell below 60% in the mid-1960s,
and below 40% by the beginning of the 1980s.   When the
Labour Government came to power in 1984 it was 30% of the
average wage ($84.17 per week), but it was subsequently
adjusted upwards to 53% of the average wage ($210 per week) in
1987.   Increased again in dollar terms at the beginning of
1988 (to $225 per week, or 51% of the average wage), it was
effectively higher than the minima established in 20% of
awards then prevailing.  11    
    It is not uncommon for an economic gloss to be put on
the 'case' for a minimum wage.   For example, Brosnan and
Wilkinson in their defence of minimum wages in New Zealand
argue that:
        Besides the effect on living
standards, cheap labour brings with it a clear cost in
economic terms.   Within the workplace, it is a cause of low
morale, poorer standards and higher labour turnover.   At
the level of the individual firm, reliance on low pay as a
competitive strategy reduces the incentive to innovate and
invest.   At the industry and sector level, low wage
competition produces uncertainty for individual firms,
destabilises the business environment and hinders economic
growth.   At the macroeconomic level, low pay also results
in reduced demand for goods and services.   Finally, from
the taxpayer 's point of view, low pay increases dependence on
social security, resulting in higher levels of public
expenditure.     (1989, pp. 91-2)    
    The justifiability of this reasoning is considered in
the following chapter.  
    A wide range of regulations other than the minimum
wage affect the conditions of employment and the cost of
employing labour.   The eight-hour day/forty-hour week,
statutory vacation requirements, requirements for
maternity/paternity leave, occupational health and safety
regulations, accident compensation levies and industry
training levies all determine the condition under which an
employee can be taken on, and the cost of employing him or
her.   They make voluntary agreements to do things
differently, where this is the interest of both employer and
worker, impermissible - the implication being that society
knows better.  
    Another range of interventions similarly affecting the
nature of employment relationships involves those dictating
how the relationship between employer and worker can be
conducted (as opposed to specifying minimum conditions
directly).   Into this category fall such interventions as
legislation against discrimination on the basis of sex, race
or disability where this is irrelevant to the job.   It also
includes legislation on the conditions under which an employee
can be dismissed - legislation against 'unjust' dismissal,
redundancy requirements or plant closure laws - each of which
indirectly raises the costs associated with employment, and
the incentives for job creation.  
    The emphasis here can extend beyond outcomes to
defining permissible procedures - further 'usurping' the role
of unions and legislation establishing bargaining procedures
in unionized firms or occupations.   This is increasingly
being reinforced in judicial practice in New Zealand and
overseas, as the courts tend towards a  'substantive' approach
to justice, for example, looking beyond formal contracts in an
attempt to discover whether they are the outcome of  'real'
bargaining processes.  12      
        2.3 Recent Initiatives      
    Since the passage of the Labour Relations Act in 1987,
there have been a number of significant policy issues raised
in the area of labour market regulation.   These include the
reform of labour relations in the state sector, the
establishment of a state- and employer-funded Trade Union
Education Authority, proposals for 'employment equity'
(affirmative action and comparable worth) and 'industrial
democracy' legislation, a proposal to bring some independent
contractors under the Labour Relations Act, proposals for
levying employers to support training, proposals for the
reform of shop trading hours and occupational health and
safety regulations, as well as attempts to establish a
'Compact' between unions and the government with a view to a
more co-ordinated union influence not only in labour market
issues but in general policy formation.  
    The state sector reforms were particularly significant
in that they represented a far greater shift away from the
traditional system of labour market regulation than the
reforms contained in the Labour Relations Act.   In other
cases, most notably the 'employment equity', independent
contractors and 'industrial democracy' proposals and
negotiations towards a 'Compact', the tendency has been
towards a more collectivist approach&semi; a reinforcement of the
traditional system and the ideology underpinning it.   This
reflects a view that more reliance on voluntary exchange -
'the market' - in other areas of economic activity, rather
than increasing the pressures on employers to upgrade their
employment relationships, has rendered workers   more  
vulnerable.   Thus the Royal Commission on Social Policy in
1988 (apparently labouring under the misapprehension that
'freedom' in labour markets is all about driving wages
downwards) reported, with approval, that:
        The free market model is argued by
some as not being appropriate for New Zealand conditions.
  That model is argued to be based on 'Western European
values of freedom and individual rights and a belief that
active pursuit of these will result in the greatest good for
all' ... [it is argued that] this approach is monocultural,
taking no account of collective values, ignoring existing
structural inequalities, and creating greater inequalities.
  Similarly ... the free market ethic [is viewed] as
resulting in a society 'which serves the needs of those who
command power and financial resources: in New Zealand this
group is predominantly white, middle class, middle aged,
able-bodied and male'.   The Commission is broadly in
agreement with these criticisms.     (1988, p.
512)    
    Late nineteenth century concerns with 'bargaining
power' and exploitation, and a belief in the comforts of
coerced (as opposed to voluntary) collective responses, are
clearly alive and well in late twentieth century New
Zealand.  
        Independent Contractors and the Labour
Relations Act      
    In 1988 a Committee of Inquiry was established to
consider whether independent contractors who were
 'substantially dependent' on a single firm should be brought
within the jurisdiction of the Labour Relations Act.   While
this matter remains unresolved, it is an important one, in
that it turns on the fundamental differences between the law
applying to employment relationships and the remainder of
commercial law in New Zealand.   A contractor who is deemed
'independent' is free to structure his or her relationship
with a firm on his or her own account and in accordance with
his or her own interests&semi; within the broad constraints of
commercial law, the voluntary exchange principles of the
market apply.   if, on the other hand, that contractor is
deemed to be an 'employee', for example, on account of a heavy
reliance on a single firm for contracts, the conduct of that
relationship would become the prerogative of a union.  
    From one perspective, this can be seen as an argument
about 'exploitability'.   If the employment relationship is
regarded as   fundamentally   exploitative, it is not
surprising that the relationship between a small contractor
and a large company will similarly be regarded as
exploitative.   If the power of the union to exploit the
employee is ignored, so too will be the power of the union to
exploit a contractor.  
    In essence, however, it is an argument about
territory.   Independent contracts have been used
increasingly by employers and workers alike to avoid the
constraints imposed by a centralized system of collective
bargaining, presumably because it is in the interests of both
to do so.   The drive by the central union hierarchy to have
these contracts relabelled as  'dependent contracts' (Knox,
1986, p. 24) was in this sense primarily a move in defense of
the award system, at a time when increased pressures on
individual firms to improve their international
competitiveness were raising important questions about the
compatibility of this system with their survival and the
security of employment.   (In this regard, the increasing
importance of independent contractors in New Zealand is
matched by the rise of self-employment in the United Kingdom.
  Mather (1987) reports increases in self-employment between
1979 and 1987 ranging from 24% in the worst-performing region,
where paid employment fell by 17%, to 78% in the
best.)  
        'Employment Equity'      
    New Zealand has had equal pay legislation since 1972,
and anti-discrimination legislation (in the form of the Human
Rights Commission Act) since 1977.   The essential concern
of these two pieces of legislation is with fair treatment in
employment relationships.   In 1988, the Working Party on
Equal Employment Opportunities and Equal Pay put forward
proposals for 'employment equity' legislation, combining
target-based equal opportunities and comparable worth
(  'equal pay for work of equal value'  )
legislation (Wilson, 1988).   The emphasis here is not on
equality of treatment, but equality of outcomes (or
'intrinsically just' relativities).  
    An Employment Equity Bill, providing for mandatory,
results-oriented equal employment opportunities programmes
(that is, affirmative action) and comparable worth, was
introduced late in 1989.   This was despite widespread
opposition from the business community and from government
officials concerned about incongruities between the Bill and
at least the announced intentions of the Labour Relations Act,
and about the likely costs of comparable worth, both fiscally
and in terms of unemployment.   The government, however,
regarded itself as having made a strong electoral commitment
to the policy, and the Bill was passed into law in July
1990.  
    The key assumptions underlying the Act are familiar
ones: the concentration of women in a limited range of
occupations and a gap between the average wages of women and
men are seen as reflecting discrimination&semi; discrimination is
seen as inherent in market relationships (according to some,
markets are little more than a tool of white male oppression),
and the only means of countering this  'discrimination' is
thought to be the creation of a rational, wise and caring
'gender-neutral' bureaucracy, charged not with uncovering and
penalizing discriminatory behaviour, but with promoting equal
outcomes, whether in paid rates or in the distribution of
women and cultural minorities across jobs and job
hierarchies.  
    The 'employment equity' proposals increase in
significance once they are placed in the broader context of a
strongly collectivist labour relations system.   This system
already serves to equalize wages and conditions across broad
categories of workers and establish fairly rigid relativities
between categories.   Notions of 'just price' and comparable
worth are in a sense already strongly enshrined in this
system, and 'the market' is already substantially squeezed
out.   In so far as discrimination is a problem, it must
therefore be seen as enshrined not in the market but in the
system that has sought to replace it.  
    The Employment Equity Act provides for these policies
to be implemented by an 'Employment Equity Commissioner',
given extensive powers both to set and to enforce policy,
allowed considerable information-gathering and entry rights,
and subject to minimal appeal rights.   The resulting
combination of virtually unlimited power over employers and
workers with very limited accountability is noticeably at odds
with attempts in other areas of government activity to
separate policy advice from policy implementation, and to
increase bureaucratic accountability.  
    The part of the Act dealing with 'equal employment
opportunities' is highly prescriptive.   Detailed programmes
are required for a wide range of  'designated groups' - women,
M&amacron;ori, Pacific Islanders, workers with physical
or mental disabilities, and any other group of workers that
the Commissioner might decide to designate.   (It could be
assumed that some means would be found of excluding white,
able-bodied men from these designations.) The Commissioner is
also given the right to set minimum standards for programmes
(including for the required 'targets'), and to require
amendments to programmes, both when they are first being
prepared and after they have been in force for two or more
years - without any right of appeal.  
    The part of the Act concerned with comparable worth
(under the misnomer 'pay equity') is even more cumbersome and
reliant on bureaucratic intervention.   One notable feature
is the effective exclusion of women not represented by a union
or represented by a union unwilling to take a comparable worth
claim, as claims could only be implemented through the
existing award system.   Another is the minimal provision
for recognition of 'economic factors' in assessing and
implementing claims.   A third is the direct conflict
between some provisions of this Act and the Labour Relations
Act.   In particular, comparable worth claims will be based
on paid, not award rates, thus reintroducing a form of the
second-tier bargaining which was removed by the Labour
Relations Act.   Further, the Act provides access to
compulsory final offer arbitration for the settling of
comparable worth claims, a move that is in conflict with the
removal of compulsory arbitration in 1984.  
    Overall, the Employment Equity Act represents a
significant reversal on at least the rhetoric which
accompanied the Labour Relations Act.   It can be expected
to reinforce the centralization of wage determination and the
preoccupation with relativities that have long characterized
labour relations in New Zealand.  
        'Industrial Democracy' and the
'Compact'      
    In 1989, a Committee of Inquiry was established to
consider legislation for   'industrial
democracy'  , which was defined as    'meaningful
participation'   by workers in the decisions affecting
their working lives, at the workplace, enterprise, industry
and national level.   This task was subject to widely
varying interpretations, and was only partly limited by the
requirement that such legislation should be consistent with
the intentions of the Labour Relations Act.   But one
important motivation appears to have been an interest in the
applicability of the 'corporativist' models of Germany,
Austria and the Scandinavian countries to the New Zealand
labour market system, with 'codetermination' at the company
level, industry-wide planning, and participation of union
officials in economic planning at a national level - an
interpretation that has been adopted with some enthusiasm by
the Council of Trade Unions (Douglas, 1989).  
    'Codetermination' would represent a significant
development in shifting decision-making power away from
shareholders and the managers who represent them, and thus
away from those individuals who bear the key risks associated
with a company 's activities.   It is a logical extension of
the argument that the 'bargaining weakness' of workers can
only be overcome by the politicization of the employment
relationship - and ultimately a grasping by 'labour' of the
decision-making prerogatives of 'capital'.   A similar
notion is at work in negotiations towards a 'Compact' between
the Council of Trade Unions and the government
(  employers'   organizations having declined to
participate).  
    The report of the Committee of Inquiry was released
late in 1989.   It recommends highly prescriptive
legislation for participatory councils to be established
within enterprises, a move towards more industry-level
consultation, and an expansion of national tripartite
initiatives.  
    The Committee 's report reinforces the concerns about
the direction of labour market policy which were created by
the likes of the 'employment equity' initiatives.   It is a
strange mixture of assertions of pragmatism and rather crude
pseudo-Marxist ideology, of logical inconsistency and confused
empirical reference.   It illustrates the conviction that
competition in the labour market is between employers and
workers.   And its recommendations are both highly
prescriptive and biased in favour of reinforcing the position
of the existing union hierarchy.   The one strong impression
that it creates is of a will to legislate, contrary to the
Committee 's own asserted preference for voluntary solutions.
  Indeed, the Committee 's approach was nicely summarized in
its own assertion that:     'Our approach is
pragmatic.   We do not intend to embark on philosophic,
academic or broadly principled analyses.'     (Horn
  et al  ., 1989, p. 26)  
        State Sector Reforms      
    The state sector in New Zealand accounts for around
25% of the work-force.   The system of collective bargaining
that applies to this work-force has from the beginning
differed fundamentally from that operating in the private
sector.   In particular, registration has not been required
for unions to be recognized and the awards they negotiate to
be legally binding.   In some instances union membership is
voluntary, including in the Public Service Association which
is the dominant representative of state employees.  
    On the other hand, wages and conditions in the state
sector have tended to be more susceptible to direct
intervention than those prevailing in the private sector.
  This in part reflects the practice of setting wages by
reference to a set of relativities with the private sector and
within the public sector where comparable jobs cannot be found
in the private sector.   But the practice is reinforced by
the notion that public sector pay, conditions and practices
should set an example for the private sector, for example,
with regard to equal pay and the rights of women and
minorities.  
      The activities of government departments were
subjected to increased competition with the move to
corporatize their trading activities through the formation of
state-owned enterprises (SOEs).   This in turn created a
need for greater flexibility in employment contracts.
  Provisions to enable collective bargaining on an
enterprise basis were included in the SOE legislation which
came into effect in April 1987.  
    A concern to reform 'core' (non-trading) government
activities similarly brought renewed attention to public
sector labour relations, and to proposals to change state
sector pay-fixing mechanisms.   The State Sector Act passed
in 1988 sought to reduce disparities between the private and
state sectors, for example, applying union registration
requirements to state unions, and abolishing the special
appeals procedures.   It also introduced fundamental changes
in personnel arrangements&semi; heads of departments were replaced
with chief executives appointed (with a Ministerial right of
veto) for a maximum of five years, who were to be responsible
for all other appointments within their departments.
  Automatic wage adjustments applying across the state
sector were abolished.  
    The flexibility of arrangements now possible in the
state sector is notably greater than in the private sector.
  There have been important moves in the direction of
enterprise bargaining, both in the SOEs and through a move
(advocated by the Public Service Association) to
department-by-department agreements.   The parameters of
union coverage have also become negotiable, so that there are
effectively no legislative constraints on the nature of
representation.  
    The result is a system which is more responsive to
worker and employer needs than the private sector system under
the Labour Relations Act.   However, it remains in essence a
similar system.   It takes its justification from the same
sorts of concerns about the potential for exploitation of
workers by a powerful employer (the government manifesting a
profound distrust of its own bureaucracies in matters of
employment policy), and it answers these concerns with the
same policy prescription: collective bargaining and 'good
employer' requirements that shape both the contents of
employment contracts and the processes that determine
employment relations.      
  

    3.     MILITARY WIVES      
    Finch argues that the content of   husbands'  
work and the way it is organised determine the extent to which
a wife will be incorporated and the form that a wife 's
incorporation will take.  
    Traditionally, the military has preferred to recruit
single men and has imposed barriers to marriage.   These
barriers stem from the military 's insistence that priority is
given to the military role - the military must come first.
  Other close bonds   "such as marriage involve
potential conflicts of loyalties, and so may impinge on the
military 's ability to carry out its task"  . (Smith
(Ed.) 1982: 15)   Historically, women featured on the
fringes of military life as camp followers accompanying the
troops.   Even in the late 19th century the position of
military wives was precarious as they were   "not rated
except as camp followers over whom the commanding officer has
complete control"  . (Findlayson in McCubbin   et
al   (Eds.), 1976: 21)  
    Although modern military forces have a higher
proportion of married personnel, they have retained a career
structure based on the single male which is symbolized in the
phrase:   "if the army had wanted you to have a wife it
would have issued you one"  . (Kohen, 1984:
403)  2    
    The military is almost unique in the constellation of
demands it places on its members.   The most salient aspect
of a military career is an unlimited commitment&semi; no part of
the day or night, nor the service person 's life itself, is
exempt from the legitimate demands of the military.  
    This paper now explores the way in which, and the
extent to which, men 's military careers structure the lives of
their wives.   It does so by looking at military careers in
terms of their temporal aspects, spatial aspects and work
characteristics.   This is followed by an exploration of the
contributions which military wives make to their
  husbands'   careers by providing employers with "two for
the price of one" and providing their husbands with moral
support.  
    A.  HOW MEN'S WORK STRUCTURES   WIVES'  
LIVES    
    i. Temporal Aspects  
    One of the dominant characteristics of this unlimited
commitment is its temporal variability.   A service member
may work from 5am to 10pm or be home for days at a time -
  "what may be the most regular about military duty is
its irregularity"   (Kohen, 1984: 404).   A further
component of the temporal aspect of military life is that of
periodic separations of the service member from the rest of
his family.   The length of separations varies from a few
days to a year.  3    
    Both of these temporal aspects of military work have
implications for military wives.   Firstly, the irregularity
of military work disrupts plans and affects the making of
plans as shown in the following comments by two army wives:
      "  They 'd been away over a week, and we
was looking forward to having them here for a week or two...
we 'd all got plans made for the weekend... And then... less
than forty-eight hours later they 're on stand by, then within
twelve hours of that away they go... Everybody was bloody
furious about it."     (Quoted in Parker, 1985: 240)
  "It 's the going away, coming back, going
away: a few days, a few weeks, you can't ever plan anything
satisfactory."  
  (Quoted in Parker, 1985: 263)      
    The irregular hours and separations put strains and
stresses on military wives.   The loneliness which wives
suffer (especially younger wives) at being separated from
their husbands is compounded by the practice of geographic
mobility which usually separates wives from the support of
parents and old friends.  
    Older wives are   "thrust into the role of sole
parent"   (Segal, 1986: 20), which restricts their
leisure time and employment opportunities.   One airforce
wife expresses her situation in the following way:
      "  I resent the fact that my decisions
about my choices in life are coloured by my husband 's job.
  I feel that I have to compensate for my husband 's
irregular hours and absences and be ever available to fill any
father role gaps for the children 's sake."  
  (Quoted in Jans in Smith (Ed.), 1985: 70)      
    The lack of support from an extended family, the
unpredictability of the husband 's absences and the long hours
worked restrict the wife 's employment options in another way:
They close off the option of arranging to work complementary
shifts.  
    Further, the prolonged separations create an ambiguous
social situation for the military wife.   She is neither a
single parent nor a married parent.   This ambiguity can
create difficulties in her social relationships with civilians
and therefore pressures her to turn to the military community
for friendships.  
    ii. Spatial Aspects  
    (a) Mobility  
    Another aspect of "unlimited commitment" which adds to
family disruption is   "the military prerogative to
decide where the service member will live and the length of
stay"  . (Kohen, 1984: 404)  
    Military personnel experience a higher rate of
geographical mobility than almost any other group in
society.  4     While mobility is not unique, the
military family moves for different reasons than civilians.
  Civilian employees have a choice, including turning down a
promotion or changing jobs rather than moving.   However, as
Eril Deighton (a former President of the Army Wives
Association) points out, military families move often and not
out of choice,   "not to a place we want to live in, not
always on promotion, not to a home we would like to live in
and often not with sufficient notification of the
move"  .     (Quoted in Smith, 1982: 1)  
    The effects of high mobility are different for the
husband than the wife.   The husband 's career is generally
enhanced by mobility, whereas his wife 's career is generally
undermined.  
    A number of studies indicate that the frequency and
uncertainty of postings of their husbands place many military
wives at a labour market disadvantage.  5     High
mobility means frequent breaks in the military wife 's
employment or education and training.   This discontinuity
limits opportunities for career development or for accruing
such benefits as long service and sick leave or
superannuation.   Wives may also be located in service
establishments in areas where employment opportunities are
limited&semi; they may have to search for jobs in unfamiliar
geographic areas (where they have no contacts to facilitate
their employment)&semi; they may experience difficulties
transferring their qualifications from one place to another
and may also experience some job discrimination as some
employers   "are reluctant to employ people they know
will be moving in a couple of years"  . (Hamilton, 1986:
41)   Moreover, the concomitant lack of experience, training
and seniority may result in lower earnings for military
wives.  
    The military wife 's employment position reduces the
possibility for a second income for the military family.
  Consequently, there are a number of "reluctant" one-income
families or precarious two-income families, which are unable
to enter into financial commitments that depend on a second
income because of the ever present possibility that the second
income will be lost on posting.   Paid work is not only
valued for its economic rewards, it is also a source of
personal identity, personal worth and social relationships not
only for men but also increasingly for women.   Thus, the
unemployment and under-employment of military wives can cause
problems of personal identity and self worth and deprive them
  "of an important channel through which they can form
links with a new community and develop support networks for
themselves"  . (Hamilton, 1986: 42)  
    The husband 's job also constrains military
  wives'   education and re-education opportunities.
  The difficulties posed by living in remote areas and often
having full responsibility for child care are compounded by
their mobile lifestyle.   Postings often occur after the
close of enrolments for courses, so the first year of a
posting may be wasted in educational terms.   It is also
  "very difficult to complete courses without
interruptions by postings or to transfer to a different
educational institution without loss of credits"  .
(Hamilton, 1986: 50)  
    Social attachments help to make people the kind of
person they are, not only in other people 's eyes but also in
their own estimation.   Frequent moves (as well as
separations from their husbands) mean that military wives
experience frequent losses of social attachments in the normal
course of their lives.   Husbands have their jobs to give
them a considerable degree of continuity.  
    But the frequent losses of social attachments can
shake the military wife 's self confidence, damage her
self-esteem and create self-identity problems.   These
problems are compounded by the handicaps wives have trying to
make new attachments: their ambiguous "sole parent/married
parent" status, their responsibilities for child care, their
restricted employment opportunities, and the short time that
they are resident in any one area.  
    In her study of Australian Service families, Hamilton
(1986) found that after a period of five - ten years some
families feel that the effort of being a newcomer in yet
another community is too great, they   "stop trying to
make new friends and contacts and withdraw from community life
- in effect simply living out the time until the next posting
comes round"  . (Hamilton, 1986: 26)   Not only is
making new friends difficult but parting from friends can be
painful as one military wife comments after moving from a very
close friend:
      "The greatest tragedy (of moving) is
leaving your friends.   I really had problems after our last
move&semi; I have a very close friend in... and I suppose it took
me almost a year before I got over that.   I think one might
get to the stage of saying to yourself that 'I 'm not going to
get really close to people because of the painful goodbyes
we 'll have'.   Maybe you can't afford to need others too
much."  
  (Quoted in Jans in Smith (Ed.), 1985: 68)      
    The lack of continuity of health care is one further
aspect of mobility which has implications for military wives.
  Hamilton (1986) found that in the areas of gynaecological
and obstetric services many women felt deprived by being
unable to have a continuing relationship with a doctor they
knew and trusted.   Also they experienced further
difficulties when posted to remote areas.  
    (b) Tied Housing  
    In many postings there is no alternative accommodation
to living in military housing.   Although this offers
convenience to the husband in that he is close to work, it
minimises the wife 's freedom to choose accommodation and
produces problems of isolation as it distances her from
civilian jobs and services and reduces the prospects of mixing
with the civilian community.  
    Military houses are not only allocated but done so
basically according to rank.   Accommodation for military
personnel on military property is spatially separated by rank
in that there are areas set aside for different rank
groupings.   Further, the quality of the house tends to be
related to rank: the higher the rank the better the quality of
house.   As Macmillan points out,   "the ordinary
soldier will be accommodated in a flat, the NCO in a terraced
house, and the officer in one with three bedrooms and an
open-plan sitting-room on the model of the average council
house"  . (Macmillan, 1984: 102)   This has several
implications for military wives, e.g., wives are designated a
rank by the house they live in and by their neighbours and
hence, to a large extent, the people they socially relate with
are chosen by the military.  
    An Australian study (Jans, 1985) found that less than
half of the wives living in married quarters were satisfied
with their housing, and a quarter were clearly dissatisfied.
  There are several causes for this dissatisfaction,
including the low standard of housing, the poor standard of
maintenance, discrepancies in the fittings provided, and
inconsistency in the standard of houses.   These last two
points have consequences for the placement of furniture and
the adequacy of furnishings.   A further factor may
contribute to this dissatisfaction.   Ownership of and
residence in one 's own home is a cultural goal in most
contemporary Western societies.   Military families, because
of their high geographic mobility, are less likely than
civilian families to live in or own their own home.   Many
military wives are frustrated by this non-fulfilment of a
major cultural goal. (Hellyer in Smith (Ed.), 1987: 1)  
    The combination of tied accommodation and non home
ownership leaves the wife in a precarious position if the
marriage breaks up, as the military will house the husband
while the wife will be homeless.   Husbands can use this to
intimidate their wives:
      "He can always threaten you that he 'll
leave you and go back into barracks.   There 's no answer to
his question, 'And where 'll that leave you?'   You know
where, out on the street."  
  (Quoted in Parker, 1985: 272)      
    One further aspect of living in tied military
accommodation is that of the housing inspections which take
place when a family leaves a military house.   Many wives
find these inspections (marching out) a humiliating
experience, for   "although the serviceman is held
responsible in theory, in practice it is his wife who is
considered  'dirty' or  'slovenly'"  . (Jolly, 1987:
46)  
    The behaviour of all military personnel is subject to
military scrutiny.   The degree to which it conforms to
military expectations can affect the career of personnel.
  When living on military installations military personnel
are under more pressure to conform   "because they are
more subject to military control and attention"  .
(Segal, 1986: 23)   This also applies to their families.
  Violations of prescribed behaviour can not only have
repercussions in the workplace but also result in pressure on
the husband to control family members.  
    Living on a military base intensifies the
incorporation of the wife into a military way of life.   The
latter has clearly defined role obligations and benefits for
the wife, which are largely determined by her husband 's rank
and position.   Jolly (1987) notes that there is a growing
number of wives who criticise the effects that living on
military establishments has on personal identity.   The
undermining of individuality, the pressures to conform and the
extension of the rank structure to families are all part of
married patch life which one ex-military wife describes as
  "an oppressive, claustrophobic and anachronistic life
led by women who have no status other than that conferred on
them by their husband 's rank"  .   (Quoted in Jolly,
1987: 55)  
    In recent years the military, particularly on
large military establishments, has developed services which
ostensibly aim to assist military personnel and their families
in coping with the difficulties of military life.   However,
these services facilitate the military 's invasion of private
life as this wife 's comment illustrates:
        "The bloody Families Officers seem to
think they 're responsible for our morals while our husbands
are away.   They come round for a 'friendly' chat with you,
and you get the feeling they 're prying into your private
life."     (Quoted in Parker, 1985: 269)      
        iii. Work Characteristics    
      (a) Spilling Over    
    There is the ever present possibility that a military
husband will be subject to physical injury or death.
  Although this risk is greatest in wartime, even peacetime
military training exercises entail some risk of injury, and
military personnel can be sent at any time to areas of armed
conflict.   The possibility that her husband may be injured
or killed not only places an extra stress on the military wife
but can also be used by her husband and the military as a form
of emotional blackmail.   For example, the "don't have an
argument with your husband before he goes flying - you may
never see him again" message which wives of pilots are given.
  In peacetime, military personnel spend a lot of time
preparing for active duty by engaging in military training
exercises.   These exercises can be very demanding on
participants.   They are often conducted in adverse physical
conditions and can be stressful, emotionally draining and
physically exhausting.   After exercises, home becomes a
haven with implications for the wife:
        "When your husband comes back, if he has
been away on a hard exercise... he does not want to hear for
the first thing what a terrible time you have been having -   he
wants to come to a warm and loving home, so you have to be
able to put your own feelings in the background."  
  (Quoted in Parker, 1987: 62)      
    Leisure time is affected by the military job in
another way.   The military believes that a spirit of
comradeship, mutual trust and loyalty are essential in a
fighting force and therefore energetically promotes the
development of     esprit de corps    
on and off duty.   Consequently, male group activities such
as sporting events, "happy hours" and regular mess functions
are actively supported.   Furthermore, military personnel
are expected to attend at least some of these functions,
especially the major and more expensive ones.   The
military, therefore, demands and gets time, enthusiasm, energy
and money from personnel which some wives feel should be
directed to the family.   The exclusion of wives from many
of these activities serves to heighten their often felt
resentment of these activities which they see as a further
demonstration that their husband 's first loyalty is to the
military.   However, the     esprit de
corps     ethos is so strong that it   "can
make wives feel guilty and selfish if they seem to be
undermining it"  . (Jolly, 1987: 100)  
    (b) Setting Apart  
    The creation of military establishments, the different
lifestyle and, perhaps more importantly, the role of the
military and what it represents, sets the military apart from
the rest of the community.   Consequently, the military wife
may feel and experience isolation&semi; an isolation which is
increased by the civilian community 's inadequate understanding
of the demands of military life.   Further, the attitude of
the civilian community towards the military can vary from
admiration to outright hostility.   Hamilton found that
military wives exhibited a great lack of self-esteem which
seemed to reflect and   "perhaps exaggerate a perceived
hostility towards them by the civilian community"  .
(Hamilton, 1986: 27)      
  

        Chapter 2 The context of
discounting      
        2.1 Dynamic cost-benefit
analysis      
    Much of the unease directed at discounting is, in
fact, misdirected.   Rather the target should be its
context, dynamic cost-benefit analysis, or at a deeper level,
the underlying ethic of preference utilitarianism.  
    Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a framework for
comparing the pros and cons (in dollars) of a project.
  When costs are incurred and benefits gained at different
times, a dynamic cost-benefit model is used.   Discounting
is a weighting mechanism that enables costs and benefits that
occur at different times to be compared.  
    When a firm considers putting money into a project,
the future benefits (stream of profits) must be compared with
the costs (both upfront and ongoing).   The
  market   or   private   discount rate
used to do this is the interest rate.   To a firm, earlier
profits are more valuable than later profits since they can be
loaned at interest.  
    Individuals also employ discounting in every day
decision making, although most of us less formally than a firm
does in planning its cash flow.   Shall I buy now or save
and buy later?     Consumer   discount rates vary
enormously.  
    When the investment of public money is considered,
another type of discount rate is sometimes used - the
  social   or   public service   discount
rate.   (Whether these two are precisely the same for
natural resource development agencies reformed into State
Owned Enterprises is not clear.)  
    There are arguments from both ends of the spectrum
that social discounting is not valid&semi; one end maintains that
government should discount at the same rate as the private
sector, the other that discounting is not an appropriate
weighting mechanism for government to use.   In the middle
is the standard position that the social discount rate is
lower than the market discount rate.  
    There are two popular investment criteria in which the
discount rate plays a critical role.   The first involves
bringing all costs and benefits back to the present, thus
assessing the   net present value   (NPV).   A
positive NPV is a minimum indicator of "economic viability".
  The second criterion for acceptability is that the
expected average rate of return (the   internal rate of
return  , IRR) must be equal to the discount rate.
  These criteria are not different versions of the same rule
since they do not rank projects
consistently.    1        1  
      "It is now widely (but not yet widely enough)
realised that the present value criterion and the internal
rate of return criterion lead to accepting and rejecting the
same projects only if there are no budgetary limitations, if
projects do not preclude one another, and if streams of net
returns are first negative and then positive"    
(Stokey &amp; Zeckhauser, 1978, p.167).    
        2.2 What worries people about cost-benefit
analysis?      
    Some critics of cost-benefit analysis seem to believe
that high positive discount rates are an integral part of
CBA.    2        2     See
Pearce, 1985.     This is not so and it is
essential to distinguish problems with CBA from problems with
discounting.  
    What are the weaknesses of CBA? There are two common
criticisms that are not the fault of CBA   per se  , but
result from its misuse&semi; these two are that CBA provides a too
narrow basis for policy decisions and that there is potential
for   "  rule by experts  "   (Pearce, 1983,
p.2).  
    There are two major problems with CBA itself.   The
first is the problem of   valuation.     For
instance, in a CBA of a forestry investment, the future price
of timber must be predicted.   But there is a more
intractable valuation problem, namely the attempt to place
dollar values on goods and services that are not sold.   In
an environmental context:
        "  The problem lies in the
economic theory of value based upon the assumption that all
assets are either reproducible or substitutable e.g., swimming
pools for polluted beaches.   Thus, at least in principle,
permanent loss (non-reproducible) has zero value or has a
value of infinity - permitting, perhaps, the surrogate value
to be a function of the whim of the
calculator!  "     (Friend, 1979,
p.72).    
    The necessity of expressing everything in dollars has
been analogously (and colourfully) described as horse and
rabbit stew.   The rabbit is the small part that can
satisfactorily be represented in dollars, whereas the flavour
of the stew is dominated by the horse - the so-called
intangibles (Norton, 1984, p.88).   The horse is elusive.
        "  ... we have to know the shadow
price of environmental functions.   And in most cases this
cannot be found  "     (Hueting, 1987,
p.65).    
    The second major criticism of CBA is that those who
receive the benefits are not necessarily those who pay the
costs&semi; this is sometimes known as the   "divergence of
costs and benefits"   .   Cost-benefit analysis is a
relaxation of Pareto
optimality    3        3     An
outcome is Pareto optimal when no one is made worse off&semi; under
the present value criterion some people (or generations) can
be made worse off as long as benefits exceed costs
overall.  &semi; it does not matter where the costs and
benefits fall and so compensation need only remain potential
and not become actual (Page, 1977a, p.145).
        "...   trade-offs are all too easy
to make when the gain is ours and the cost is someone
else 's  "     (Pearce, 1977, p.360).    
    Thus, many see maximising the   present  
value of benefits minus costs (max. NPV) as
intergenerationally
unfair.    4        4     Page
comments on the present value criterion:       "To
an assembly of representatives drawn from all generations,
this criterion would not look much more attractive than the
scheme of vesting total ownership and management of the
  oceans'   fisheries to one country this year, to another
the next year, to another the following year would look to an
assembly of present-day countries"     (Page, 1977a,
p.200).    
    It is true that the use of the dollar as a numeraire
causes great problems (and, like any numeraire, always will),
and that CBA focuses on efficiency not equity.   But what is
CBA intended to achieve?   No one methodology gives all the
answers.
        "  ... cost-benefit analysis is
not a precise decision-making tool, but simply a means of
summarizing information on some aspects of social
welfare  "     (Kerr, 1987, p.9).    
    Cost-benefit analysis works best on the margin, that
is, when it is used to assess a project that is small relative
to the economy.  
    Both Kerr and Pearce express concern with the way in
which   "  an outmoded conception of
CBA  "   (Pearce, 1985, p.674) is set up as a straw
man.   In fact,   "  extended CBA  "  
(non-market valuation) is increasingly being used to make the
case for the preservation of wilderness (Porter, 1982).
  Pearce makes the point that environmental destruction in
practice often has nothing to do with CBA.
        "  ... forest clearance in the
Sahel or in Brazil, for example, has not been justified on CBA
grounds but on grounds of macroeconomic objectives which
reveal limited or non-existent understanding of the ecological
requirements for survival  "   (Pearce, 1985,
p.674).      
        Chapter 3 The mechanism of
discounting      
        3.1 The mathematics      
    How does a discount rate of, say, 10% decrease the
value of future costs and benefits relative to the present?
  Understanding the basic mathematics of discounting is
crucial since the strategic nature of the discount rate is an
outcome of the arithmetic of discounting.  
    Consider the most commonly used investment criterion,
that of maximising net present value.  
  formula  
    In calculating net   present   value,
benefits and costs must all be discounted back to the present.
  This is done using the following formula:
  formula    
    Thus, if a project yields a net value 15 years
from now of $1,000,000 and the real discount rate is 10%, then
the net present value is:
  formula    
    There are two consequences of the mathematics of
discounting that cause unease.   The first is the
sensitivity of economic viability to the size of the discount
rate&semi; the second is that over generational time, future costs
and benefits virtually disappear.   These two consequences
are discussed in the next two sections.  
        3.2 The sensitivity of net present value to
the discount rate      
    The result of calculations performed according to the
formula above are extremely sensitive to the choice of the
discount rate.  
    Consider for example, a company planning to build a
new power plant.   Should they build a coal-burning plant or
a hydroelectric plant?   Most of the cost of the thermally
generated electricity is due to the cost of coal - a stream of
costs that stretches into the future.   On the other hand,
most of the cost of hydroelectricity is due to plant
construction and is therefore concentrated in the present.  
    Suppose, for the sake of illustration, the coal plant
would burn a million dollars worth of coal a year.   The
present cost of the coal burned in the twentieth year would be
$149,000 at d = 10% but $554,000 at d = 3%.   Thus a high
discount rate favours the thermal plant because the fuel costs
are heavily discounted.   Conversely, a low discount rate
favours construction of a hydroelectric plant.  
    An interesting example of the sensitivity of economic
viability to the choice of discount rate occurred in 1959 when
a CBA was performed on the proposed Passamaquoddy tidal power
project.   This was advocated as a joint Canadian-USA
venture.   The Americans used a discount rate of 2.5%
resulting in a positive present value but the Canadians used a
discount rate of 4.125% resulting in a negative present value
(Stokey and Zeckhauser, 1978, pp.164-165).   Presumably, the
rational way out of the impasse - the Canadians subsidising
the Americans - was not politically feasible.  
    In New Zealand in the seventies the loss of "economic
viability" due to an increase in discount rate was used to
curb over-enthusiastic government investment in irrigation
projects.   The Treasury insisted on a 15% discount rate for
one class of projects rather than the standard 10% as a
discouragement tactic (Pers. comm., A. McArthur, Lincoln
University, 1990).   A more direct method of expressing
doubt would be preferable.  
    This sensitivity would not matter if discount rates
could be determined objectively.   But, historically, social
discount rates have varied over a considerable range.  
        3.3 The long term      
    A second consequence of the mathematics of discounting
is that, even at low social discount rates, the value placed
on the welfare of future generations fades away to virtually
nothing.
        "  The economic theory of
discounting is a completely rational theory.   For short
periods of time it gives answers that seem intuitively right.
  For longer periods, we are not so sure  "    
(Hardin, 1981, p.224).    
    There are many dramatic examples in the literature to
illustrate this effect.   Pearce uses a hypothetical example
involving the storage of radioactive waste (Pearce, 1983,
pp.52-53).   Imagine that we know that a $10 billion
accident will occur 500 years after we begin storing the
waste.   What is the present value of the cost of this
accident using the relatively low discount rate of 5%?  
  formula  
    In general, people do not understand the power of
compound interest (and, consequently, of discounting).
  This power may be better illustrated by discounting
backwards in time.   Manhattan Island was bought from its
native American owners for 24 dollars.   If we discount its
present value at 6% back to the time of purchase, then 24
dollars was expensive! (Pers. comm., P. Van Moeseke, Massey
University, 1989).  
        3.4 Some more definitions      
    Some more definitions will be useful at this
point.  
    What is the difference between discount rates and
interest rates?   Arithmetically, the two are the same but
they are used in different contexts.   Interest rates are
given to us&semi; they are exogenous whereas discount rates are
chosen    1        1     A good
explanation of the difference between interest rates and
discount rates is given in Stokey &amp; Zeckhauser, 1978,
pp.161-162.  .   (It is this element of choice and
therefore, of values, that leads to such controversy over
discounting.)  
    Further, the discount rate is a more general term than
the interest rate.   We do not speak of "social interest
rates".   Interest is earned on commodities including
dollars whereas discounting is applied beyond dollars to
utilities (Page, 1977a, p.149).  
    The difference between individual, market and social
discount rates has already been discussed.   There is one
further important term.   One reason why future values are
discounted is inflation&semi; we do not value $100 received next
year as highly as $100 now in our pockets because we do not
expect it to buy as much.   In social discounting, this
effect is usually subtracted out.   Thus, if inflation is
expected to average 8% over the time period of concern, a
  nominal   discount rate of 18% is equivalent to a
  real   discount rate of 10%.   Expression of an
NPV in   constant   dollars implies the use of a
real discount rate.  
    Discount rates are generally positive.   However,
they may be zero or even negative as we shall see further
on.  
        Chapter 4 Rationales for social
discounting      
        4.1 A mixture of rationales      
    The fundamental question to ask about discounting is
why do it at all.   To philosophers discounting is a
mechanism for constraining obligations, and to economists it
is a mechanism for trading off the future against the
present.  
    But these general answers do not tell us how to
discount&semi; refining the rationale - the   why   of
discounting - should tell us   how   to discount.
  And it is here that the controversy and the confusion
discussed in the first chapter originate.   Social
discounting is based on a mix of (rarely stated)
rationales.  
    It may be thought that rationales are revealed by the
choice of discount rate.   But this does not necessarily
follow.   While a high discount rate is generally taken as
indicating less regard for the future, it could also, for
instance, reflect a great pessimism about the future of
humankind.  
    In this chapter I describe the various rationales that
are given or assumed when the discounting mechanism is used.
  Various writers have discussed these rationales&semi; the most
complete attempts I have come across are those by the moral
philosopher Derek Parfit (1983) and the public policy analyst
Robert Goodin (1982).   By focusing on the work of these two
I do not wish to imply that economists are ignorant of their
views.  
    Parfit lists six separate rationales and Goodin, four,
but they cover much the same ground.   These rationales are
listed in Table 1.   table    
    Goodin 's approach is much closer to the standard
economic approach that forms the basis for the next chapter.
  Parfit goes somewhat deeper.   He is not content to
accept pure time preference as a rationale&semi; he wants to know
why people give preference to that which is closer in
time.  
    The following discussion of Parfit 's arguments is
similar to that in Wright (1988).   I have decided to
reproduce it here because the arguments may become clearer in
a different context.  
        4.2 Democracy      
    This argument is that if the majority of people in a
country believe there is no need to worry about the future,
then neither should the government.   Individuals generally
discount the future heavily and therefore so should a
democratically elected government.   Public policy should
reflect the psychological time preference of the electors.  
    Parfit counters this by arguing that moral
justification does not rest on majority beliefs.   We do not
approve Nazism because a majority of Germans supported
it.  
        4.3 Probability      
    Uncertainty as a rationale for time discounting is
presented at the beginning of utilitarian thought where
Bentham gives it as one of two factors diminishing the value
of a pleasure or a pain (Goodin, 1982, p.56).  
    The argument goes that uncertainty correlates with
remoteness - in time, and in space to a lesser degree.   We
are uncertain about what will be viewed as valuable in the
future&semi; we are uncertain about the results of our actions and
policies&semi; we are uncertain about the achievements of future
technology.   Therefore, when we look ahead to future costs
and benefits, we scale down their size.  
    But uncertainty does not always correlate with
remoteness.
        "...   ignorance does not proceed
by fixed percentage increments each year  "    
(Wenz, 1983, p.208).   and:
        "  When applied to the further
future, many predictions are indeed   more   likely to
be true  "     (Parfit, 1983, p.33).    
        4.4 Opportunity costs      
    This is the   "  most orthodox
justification  "   for discounting (Goodin, 1982,
p.58).   Benefits received earlier rather than later can be
reinvested to yield more benefits.   Thus, the argument is
that the discount rate(s) used in the evaluation of public
investments should be based on the rate of return that would
be earned by alternative uses of the money.   Under this
reasoning, a zero discount rate is considered to favour the
future over the present.  
    A basic problem with opportunity cost discounting is
that it fails to distinguish between   investment  
and   consumption.  
        "  It says that if you are
thinking in terms of investments, you should demand the most
advantageous rate of return, and you should discount less
profitable investment opportunities in light of more rewarding
ones.   But there are some goods we want to consume rather
than reinvest  "     (Goodin, 1982,
pp.58-59).    
    Freeman has argued that the opportunity cost concept
of discounting can be used as a tool for intergenerational
  equity   as well as intergenerational
  efficiency   (Freeman, 1977).   Because
    "  the exponential arithmetic of discounting
works both ways  "    , part of the benefit from a
project can be invested to provide monetary compensation when
it is needed.    1        1  
  Suppose a project with a positive NPV is initiated that
imposes harms on the future.   Freeman argues that some of
the benefit from the project can be invested in order to
provide compensation for these future harms.   There will be
plenty of money for such compensation.   Just as discounting
rapidly erodes a large future value to a small present value,
interest compounds a small investment now into a large future
amount.   For some discussion of Freeman 's compensation
principle, see Mishan, 1982, pp.290-291, and Pearce, 1983,
pp.54-55.    
    There are a number of problems with this idea of an
intergenerational compensation fund.   There is no guarantee
of compensation.
        "  The standard argument for
discounting says that it is permissible to harm the future, as
long as it might be possible to benefit the future on net
balance by a compensating investment,   whether or not  
the investment is taken  "     (Page, 1983, p.55,
my emphasis).    
    Further there is a presupposition that everything can
be compensated for in money and another that
    "  the interest rate i actually   will  
prevail throughout the period  "    , an unlikely
possibility (Goodin, 1980).  
        4.5 Our successors will be better
off      
    If we believe that people in the future will be better
off than we are now, we may decide to discount future benefits
and costs.   In economic language this is known as
discounting for diminishing marginal utility.   As more of a
good is acquired the utility or benefit gained from each
additional unit of that good falls.   To not discount in an
increasingly rich society is tantamount to the poor
sacrificing for the rich.  
    Economists would question the validity of this
rationale for discounting.   They would prefer to see
decreasing or increasing marginal utility dealt with
explicitly by adjusting the values of future benefits and
costs before discounting.   However, this expectation does
feed into pure time preference.  
        4.6 Excessive sacrifice      
    Consider a situation in which the present generation
may bear a cost that yields benefits to an infinite number of
future generations.   No matter how large the present cost,
it will always be outweighed by the sum of future benefits no
matter how small the benefit to each future generation.  
    The corollary is that we must discount future benefits
in order to avoid being obliged to make intolerable sacrifices
for future people.  
    Parfit argues that although   "  the argument
from excessive sacrifice  "   may be a valid reason
for discounting in some instances, it is irrational to use it
as a general argument for social discounting.
        "  Suppose that, at the same cost
to ourselves now, we could prevent either a minor catastrophe
in the nearer future or a major catastrophe in the further
future.   Since preventing the major catastrophe would
involve no extra cost, the Argument from Excessive Sacrifice
fails to apply.   But if we take that argument to justify a
discount rate, we can be led to conclude that the major
catastrophe is less worth preventing  "    
(Parfit, 1983, p.35).    
        4.7 Special relations      
    It is observed that humans feel the greatest
obligations to those closest to them both in space and in
time.   People feel greater responsibility to their children
than to other children or to their great grandchildren.
  Most of us recognise stronger obligations to those with
whom we have a special relationship whether it be shared
blood, values, country, race, generation or whatever.
  Thus, we discount for   "  degrees of
kinship  "   (Parfit, 1983, pp.35-36).  
    This rationale is more commonly known as psychological
discounting or biological discounting&semi; economists tend to
capture it within the expression "pure time preference".  
    However, discounting for kinship is not always
acceptable.   Parfit uses the example of atmospheric nuclear
tests.   Governments who protect their own citizens at the
expense of aliens are not generally considered to be acting
morally (Parfit, 1983, p.36).  
    Further,   "  degrees of
kinship  "   do not decrease according to the
mathematics of discounting.   We feel obligations most
strongly to the next generation, rather less to the next, and
after that it tends to level out.   Our feelings about the
fifth generation from now are no different from those about
the seventh generation from now.  
          4.8 Is a social discount rate
justified?      
    Parfit 's basic message is that   why   we
discount will determine   how   we discount.   He
sees the mathematics of opportunity cost discounting as
imposing an inappropriate form on other types of discounting.
  He is not saying that society should not discount but that
there is no justification for   a   social discount
rate, that is, for one formula and one value.  
        "  It may often be morally
permissible to be less concerned about the more remote effects
of our social policies.   But this would never be because
these effects are more remote.   Rather it would be because
they are less likely to occur, or will be effects on people
who are better off than we are, or because it is cheaper now
to ensure compensation - or it would be for one of the other
reasons I have given.   All these different reasons need to
be judged separately, on their merits.   To bundle them
together in a social discount rate is to blind our moral
sensibilities  "  (Parfit, 1983a,
p.36).        
  

      VIVIAN HUTCHINSON  
        The Planetary Pakeha      
    I am Vivian Hutchinson.   Born and brought up in
Taranaki, where I still live and work.   I love my mountain
and can't imagine being away from it for too long.   I 'm a
fifth-generation Pakeha New Zealander, my great-great-forebear
with the Hutchinson name having come to this country with the
65th Light Infantry Regiment.   His wife was from an English
coal-mining community.   On my mother 's side my male
ancestors derived from poor Scottish farming immigrants of
the McIntyre name, who brought up big families and worked the
soil here.   As family reunions have shown me, my
  ancestors'   blood has well and truly mixed with that of
the tangata whenua of these islands and I have many Maori
distant cousins.  
    I 'm from a family of four brothers scattered over this
country.   My father worked during his life as an engineer
and a manager of a wire firm servicing farms in Taranaki.
  He died when I was eighteen.   My mother has married
again and is retired to the harbour 's edge near Whangarei.
  One of my brothers fought in Vietnam and was a leader in
the South Island Territorials, but now grows carnations in
a thriving business.   Another has worked for years in soil
and water conservation issues for various authorities in the
South Island, and farms goats.   The third has worked in
surveying and also for himself, and more recently has spent
many years on the dole happily raising his kids.   I am a
gay man and presently live with my love and partner in life,
Tony Hansen, in the Westown suburb of New Plymouth.  
    My vocation is trying to make a difference.   I used
to think I was a community worker.   Now I think of myself
as a social-change worker.   I won't pretend to be very
successful in my vocation, but I believe I have
persistence.  
    I am particularly interested in making a difference to
unemployment and the future of work.   I see how this
also relates to poverty and deprivation in New Zealand and
questions of the future of the welfare state.   I am also
interested in bringing more love into economics.   And I
have been working on these issues in one way or another since
I left secondary school in 1973.  
    In doing something about these things, I have helped
the Salvation Army run its work schemes in Taranaki, and I
now work as community adviser to the Taranaki Work Trust,
helping manage a variety of projects aimed at the unemployed.
  I help people to start up their own businesses, and teach
the skills of enterprise.   I write.  
    I am fatter than most people, weighing in at nineteen
stone.   I have my front teeth missing.   I love swimming
at Back Beach near our Sugarloaf Islands.   I particularly
enjoy watching music on television, and every now and then
I 'll learn a song for myself.   I read the
  Dominion   and especially like the Doonesbury cartoons
on page two.  
    I am a friend and keen supporter of the Tauhara Centre
in Taupo and go there quite often.   I try to contribute to
its mission of creating a place where people of differing
viewpoints and methods of working can come together in a
search for truth, goodwill and understanding.  
    I am writing this chapter while taking a break in the
Tauhara chalet, overlooking a clear and blue summer 's
lake.  
    I call myself a Pakeha just because it feels
right.   I like it as a superficial label.   It tells me I
am primarily of European descent but have a special
relationship with these islands.   I am also wary of the
label.   I have never felt good about fences, particularly
fences of identity.   I seem to contain too many impulses
that shout otherwise.  
    I have also never felt good about people making
assumptions about me just because I am wearing a cultural
label.   I have been hurt by assumptions made of me... and
know I have hurt others by the assumptions I have made about
them.   Labels don't help.  
    But thinking of myself as Pakeha certainly means
something to me.  
    It means all the things I have learnt about being a
human being from attending kindergarten, primary, intermediate
and secondary schools, the Anglican Church... being brought up
in a fairly middle-class family, watching lots of television,
playing sport as a youngster, watching my brother go to war
and my uncle have a beer at the RSA, discovering how things
worked through inventions and new technology, learning the ins
and outs of family businesses, observing the festivals of the
year at Easter, Christmas and on Anzac Day.  
    These things are the inheritance of my parents, my
family and the context that I grew up in.   And when I was
growing up, these things all gave me an identity map which I
never really had the capacity to question.  
    I sure as hell did start to question things as soon as
I left home, however.   To some extent it was the fashion of
the day.   I remember at age eighteen reading James K.
Baxter when he summarised the Calvinist doctrines behind
our Pakeha way of life with four commandments:
    Work Is Good, Sex Is Bad, Do as You Are Told and
It Will Be All Right    , and     Don't Look
Too Deeply into Yourself    .  
    Sure, from the distance of now being thirtysomething,
it 's very much an oversimplified condemnation... but in my
teenage years it seemed a pretty good summary of what I was
rebelling against.  
    Fortunately at the time, I quickly realised that part
of being Pakeha also meant the freedom to say  'stuff you' to
all of this.   In the early seventies there seemed to be an
entire youth culture saying exactly that.   So when I left
home I got on with my own journey, which led me to discover
the gifts of many of the different ways of living on these
islands and on this planet at this time.   Even though I
have ended up with a lifestyle and view of who I am that is
very different from my   parents'   and the way of life
they handed on to me, I still call myself Pakeha.   It is a
label of preference.   And I hope that when I meet people we
can both greet our preferred labels... and somehow also get
beyond them.  
    I don't deny the gifts I receive from being
Pakeha.   They are many and varied.   It 's just that I 'm
the sort of person who is going to pick and choose the gifts I
want to hold close to myself.   Some of the gifts I can
indeed treasure.   Others I have some trouble with.  
    Some of the things about being Pakeha that I am proud
of include our love for this land, our links with Britain,
Jesus and the Christian teachings, symphony orchestras,
musicians like Bob Dylan, Paul Simon and Sting, composers like
Mozart and Bach, reading John Mortimer, art galleries,
shopping, mystery serials on television, Woolworths
supermarkets, Ford Falcon station-wagons,   Footrot
Flats  , Prince Charles, hippies, the New Age, the circus,
being in business, camping at the beach, and the Labour
Party.  
    Some of the things about being Pakeha that I don't
feel so good about include the continuing legacy of injustice
between Pakeha and Maori, the way we gay people get treated,
two world wars, Korea, Vietnam and now the Gulf, bureaucracy,
unemployment, the cutting down of native trees and the
pollution of our rivers, and the Labour Party.  
    I used to think   culture   was to do with
what we believed in and what we did with each other, and who
we celebrated and valued: rugby, Jesus, the Queen, Labour Day,
the Concert Programme, pavlovas, Mark Todd, a good beer,
patchwork quilts,   KZ7   and the Bank of New
Zealand.  
    It 's like we pull all these things around us like a
cloak and they somehow define who we are.   Our leading
writers and television ad people use all these images to
describe us, and politicians use the prevailing concepts to
define policies that will suit us and keep us voting for
them.  
    But lately I have been wanting to take a few steps
back from this and ask myself: What 's the purpose of culture
anyway?   Do I belong to my culture, or does it belong to
me?   Who decides the rules of what 's right and wrong?
  Are articles and books like this part of some insidious
process of defining and therefore later controlling our
images of who we think we are?  
    We 've all been talking about this culture and
identity stuff quite a bit lately, haven't we?   I put it
down to '1990' and celebrating the hundred and fifty years of
the Treaty of Waitangi, as well as other various
anniversaries.   It just kept on bringing things up for us
all to chew over.   And not before time, either.  
    The 1990 concert at Bastion Point, grand opening
ceremonies at the Commonwealth Games, the Queen at Waitangi,
the waka, Gallipoli Anzac celebrations, Kiri in the park, the
ANZ 'Magic Minutes' on television... it 's all been a real
mixed bag, struggling for that elusive consensus on who we
think we are.    
    As I write, it was only just last year.   And,
looking back, we seemed to be having two discussions at once
on what it was to be a New Zealander.  
    First there was the official and polite discussion,
which was full of television propaganda: images and music of
the victory of the New Zealand identity, and how Maori and
Pakeha were getting on so well.  
    But behind all this there was this tentative, almost
embarrassed exploration I seemed to be witnessing almost
everywhere else whenever the subject of 1990 came up.   Here
people talked about just what Kiwi identity at this
hundred-and-fifty-year report card point is bringing up for
them.   And it has brought up some unsettling pictures of
challenge and change.  
    Treaty issues, one in nine people officially out of
work, the widening gap between rich and poor, the knife going
into our visions of the welfare state, the GATT talks in
Brussels breaking up, overcrowded prisons, a man in Aramoana
going berserk with a gun, war in the Gulf... these are the
images many of us carried with us into 1991.  
    I don't know about you, but I seemed to be
surrounded by people who found that 1990 didn't reflect who
they felt they were.   Perhaps the television
picture-streams and accompanying soundtracks were more a
picture of who we thought we   should   be rather than
the reality of who we are.   If you just think for a while
about all the different people you know who are also New
Zealanders and share your life and never appeared in those
video-montages of self-identity, you 'll have a sense of what
an impossible job it is to get a picture of our wholeness
anyway.  
    And that 's okay!  
    In fact I think that   that is the point  .  
    The point being that our vision of what it is to be a
New Zealander is leading to more and more diversity as the
years go on.  
    And this brings with it its own struggle... the
struggle to develop an image of ourselves that holds together
and honours all these scattered pieces.  
    Difference.   That 's the terror of all this
culture stuff.  
    And it seems to be the constant challenge to human
beings everywhere... how on earth do we grow up enough inside
ourselves to really cope with the difference within and
between cultural labels?  
    I for one have always been fascinated with discovering
the variations on how to be a human being.   When I was
nineteen I took out a weekly subscription on one of those
Marshall Cavendish build-your-own-encyclopedia magazines
called   The Family of Man  .   I wished it was called
  The Family of People  , but I still bought it and
loved it.  
    Every week there was a profile of at least a dozen
different racial groups or cultures... their history, their
lives today, their customs and attitudes.   It was
superficial but fascinating.   And for me it was a little
humbling to start to get a sense of humanity on its fuller
diversity.  
    But while collecting the information on difference is
one thing, having to live with it is another.  
    Difference is the thing that can bring up our greatest
fears, vulnerability and insecurity... the deep gut feelings
of Other that can arise when we are confronted with another
culture, or a hidden subculture within our shared life.
  It 's a feeling that can strike you unawares... can make
you do the most regrettable things.   Hasn't the longest
part of human conflict been fed from this raw place?  
    It would be easier to have a unity... easier to have
consensus... easier to have an assimilation that can absorb
all those rough-edges that make people different from one
another.   But I don't think we ever really did have a time
like that... nor do I think the future holds such a time for
us.  
    The challenge has always been obvious to me.   We
are just going to have to transform our attitude towards
difference.   I think it starts with esteeming our own
unique qualities personally and then seriously thinking about
how to treasure the difference in others.  
    More than this.  
    I think we can learn to accept the differences we see
out there as something that may contain important information
for ourselves... information for our own journeys and
choices ahead... information that has yet to be discovered
through our present cultural forms.  
    Perhaps the first time many Pakeha people have to
face their own sense of difference, is when they start to
interact with the Maori people of these islands.   In fact
I 'd offer the opinion that it is unlikely that many Pakeha
people in this country can define themselves without the First
People appearing in the wings of that definition somewhere.
  Not that I think there is anything wrong with that.
  There 's many a time I 've sat on the marae and heard an
orator define his Maoritanga in terms of how it differed from
Pakeha New Zealanders.  
    There 's an essential truth in there somewhere.
  That it 's very much easier to define your identity when
you are faced with a striking difference in attitudes, beliefs
and protocols such as we find between the two dominant races
here in Aotearoa.  
    And like it or not, Pakeha identity is woven into
these differences.   Despite all the rhetoric about us
all being New Zealanders and   tatou tatou  , Maori
people are not Pakeha.   And there are differences there
that cannot and should not be put into the common pot.  
    Perhaps I should just speak for myself.  
    I am certain my own experiences with Maori people have
led me more than anything else to re-examine my identity and
look again at my notions of just what culture is.   And
these experiences are a little different from what my family
upbringing would have led me to expect.  
    It was James K. Baxter who opened the door for me (and
many like me) through his poetry and articles, which reflected
a synthesis of the two main cultures here in New Zealand.
  I was reading his stuff while still at school, but I just
knew that he was writing something that was deep   within
me   as well.  
    As soon as I left school I decided to find out more
about Maori things, which took me to meeting Matarena Raumati
Rau-Kupa, a local Taranaki Maori elder also known as Aunty
Marge.   She invited me to nearby Parihaka, where together
with her husband Pepe Rau she was leading the rebuilding
of one of the famous Parihaka meeting houses,
Te-Niho-o-Te-Atiawa.   I loved Marge as soon as I met her,
and we found it easy to be good friends, despite our obvious
distance in age as well as culture.  
    What followed for me was a social and spiritual
re-education over the next few years, which took place almost
fully within a Maori context.   Considering the powerful
history of non-violent struggle at Parihaka against the
government (in the 1880s), it was a compassionate re-education
on what it was to be a New Zealander and how to come to grips
with some of the darker chapters in our history of race
relations.  
    I moved to Auckland to train as a journalist, and in
something of an informal social-worker apprenticeship, I
also worked on the streets of the inner city with Maori
community workers Betty Wark and Fred Ellis.   Betty and I
worked on many issues together, some of which led to setting
up the Arohanui hostels for street people.  
    My education in things Maori continued with meeting
Whina Cooper and working closely with her whanau in the
preparations, staging and strategy of the Maori Land March of
1975.   I did much writing and research into Maori Land
claims, particularly Bastion Point and the Raglan golf course
case.  
    When I shifted back to Taranaki in 1978, Marge and I
organised a seven-year cycle of annual gatherings at
Parihaka designed to introduce other Pakeha people to things
Maori and explore their own cultural boundaries.  
    More recently, as someone who now works primarily in
the employment and job creation arena, I have naturally
continued to have a good deal to do with Maori people,
particularly on economic issues and developing self-help
initiatives for the unemployed.  
    With all this behind me, I used to think that because
I have had lots of special experiences in a Maori context, I
understood Maori people very well.   Not true.   I am
constantly surprised at the ingenuity of many of these people,
the fertility of the way the culture absorbs and re-invents
itself in so many ways.   And that very present difference
in attitude that always has been a challenge to me as well as
a delight.  
    I think it 's more than this, though.  
    The more I have had to do with Maori people, I have
realised that I wasn't so much finding out about them - I was
finding out much more about myself.  
    This is the   identity   thing again.   Much
of my awareness of this was just lying dormant there within me
until I ran into a situation of   difference  , which
brought things up to the surface for me to look at.  
    When faced with things Maori - some of which entranced
me, some of which I found I didn't agree with - I certainly
had to get my head together on who I thought I was... and get
clear about those things that were within me.   And this
brings me back again... to   culture  , and the frames
we put around these pictures of our identity.  
    Culture has never been a static thing.   It is
an organic dynamic changing pulling pushing collection of bits
and pieces that tell us how we are getting on with being
human.   And these days I am starting to see culture as a
  strategy for awareness  .  
    I imagine somewhere in our collective history we have
discovered things that have worked: an Anglican communion
service, the rules of rugby, how to cook steak on a barbie,
decorating a Christmas tree, handing out the prizes at a
school athletics meet.  
    They are processes on how to get a job done.   They
contain all the opinions and beliefs and discussions that have
created those processes in the first place.   If we continue
to do it the same way, it becomes culture.   If we pass it
on to others or our kids it becomes tradition.   Stick at it
long enough and these processes seem to grow into the bones of
a people and become incredibly binding and defining of who we
think we are.  
    I say a  'strategy for awareness', because that 's what
I reckon is behind all this: developing our human awareness...
finding out what it is to be a human being... telling us how
to get on with our own stories.  
    Culture is a way that we have packaged up bits of the
collective software on how to do all this, whether it is
in questions of sport, spirituality, restaurant etiquette, or
in annual festivals.   Different people, different times,
different places&semi; they have all given rise to different
strategies.   And these strategies are all a part of the
performance of their truth... as best as they can be aware of
it at the time.  
    What 's happening today is that we are becoming very
aware of how other people are creating quite different
strategies for getting the same jobs done.   And within
the broad bands of cultural and subcultural identity labels -
Pakeha, American, Maori, country music buffs, lesbian,
whatever - there 's an enormous diversity.   That 's the
point.     This drive for difference.   An
evolution of human beings based on difference.  
    It 's like the equal drive in the natural kingdom of
plants and insects and animals... creating more and more
diverse species as the march of time progresses over billions
of years.   What we have ended up with in nature today is an
incredibly fragile and irreplaceable bank of genetic
information scattered throughout the planet, much of which we
are only beginning to understand: a plant in the Amazon holds
a genetic treasure that will solve leukaemia, perhaps a weed
near Invercargill holds part of the solution to the AIDS
virus.  
    Now it 's the same with culture.   The different
cultures on the planet are driven towards greater diversity, a
drive from within each of them.   And each of these diverse
groups contains valuable information for the human journey -
information we are also only now starting to really learn how
to understand.  
      My present map of all this is a keyboard like
that on a piano.   I like to think of it as the keyboard of
potential of how to be a human being.  
    Different cultures come and seem to dance over certain
notes on this keyboard.   They keep to certain tunes.
  They may leave whole sections of the keyboard completely
untouched.  
    When cultures come in dialogue to one another, they
share parts of the keyboard they know.   They sing the songs
they have discovered within them that have grown in response
to this keyboard.  
    Now I don't think there is any such thing as cultural
property rights on this keyboard.   You may choose to
dispute this point of view, but I believe this human keyboard
is an instrument that 's there within all of us and has all
sorts of sounds waiting dormant to be struck and discovered
for use.  
    I was once on the marae with a group of Americans when
one of the aunts called out her karanga in that way many of us
have heard that makes the air chill and the sound penetrate
every bone in your body.   The woman next to me said,
  'Wow.     My gut has just hit the ground.
  Those Maoris have got something very special
here!  '    
    I looked at her and remarked, 'Yes.   But it was
also   your   gut that hit the ground.   You may not
have known it before, but I 'll bet you have much the same
stuff within you.   You may not have struck that note on
your keyboard before.   But it is there, waiting.'  
    What 's tugging at all this... is
  change  .  
    Rapid change.   More change than many other
generations of the human race have had to face.   Whether
it 's in the economic, social, spiritual, technological
landscapes surrounding us, they are all shifting sands at this
time.   And it 's bringing out both the best and the worst in
us.  
    This constant change makes an equally constant assault
on our identities, on our security of who we think we are.
  That 's not comfortable.   One of the popular views of
culture is that it gives us something solid to hang onto -
that way we don't have to constantly think up solutions to our
lives.   We don't have to constantly question our ways
of doing things.   Culture can provide a refuge against all
these changes around us.  
    My theory is that it is this desire for a safe place
from change, that can quickly throw up the cultural dogmas and
fundamentalism that are also very much part of these
times.   But that 's always the problem with refuges.   The
mobile electric fences that graze the edges of our identities
can quickly turn into brick walls.      
  

          Review Of Research On Wellbeing, Self
Esteem And Interpersonal Relationships      
        Wellbeing      
    The last twenty years have seen the emergence of the
concept of subjective wellbeing as a global self assessment of
personal happiness which can serve as a central component in
the measurement of quality of life.   Classic works in the
area include "The Structure of Psychological Wellbeing" by
Norman Bradburn (1969), "The Quality of American Life" (1976)
by Campbell, Converse and Rodgers, "Social Indicators of
Wellbeing" (1976) by Andrews and Withey and Diener 's 1984
review entitled "Subjective Wellbeing".  
    In New Zealand, a series of studies was carried out or
supervised by Richard Kammann between 1975 and 1983 which
involved issues in the assessment and correlates of wellbeing.
  These studies led to the development of the Affectometer 2
(Kammann &amp; Flett, 1983), a 40 item scale measuring subjective
wellbeing.   Results of investigations of the Affectometer 2
(Kammann, Farry and Herbison, 1984&semi; Kammann &amp; Flett, 1986&semi;
Flett, 1986) led Kammann and Flett to define the concept of
subjective wellbeing in terms of a predominance of positive or
good feelings and a complete and lasting satisfaction with
life as a whole which imply feelings of cheerfulness, energy,
freedom, a sense of purpose and control and the feeling that
life is meaningful.   Other researchers have similarly
defined wellbeing in terms of a cognitive (life satisfaction)
component and an affective (balance between positive and
negative affect) component (Diener, 1984).  
    A number of criticisms have been raised with respect
to the measurement of wellbeing.   It has been suggested
that it is just a measure of depression or current mood.
  The potential biasing effect of social desirability on
responses has also been raised.   However, an examination of
the data suggests that these criticisms are unwarranted.  
    Studies by Diener and his colleagues in the United
States and by Kammann &amp; Flett (1983) in New Zealand agree
closely on how wellbeing relates to other variables.
  Although depression inventories (such as the Beck
Depression Inventory) generally correlate about 0.70 with
global measures of wellbeing, the relationship is a
curvilinear one as depression inventories fail to
differentiate adequately amongst the non-depressed members
of the population.   Wellbeing measures also show positive
skew but are more effective in differentiating positive
respondents and are thus more useful in assessing the health
of a population as opposed to diagnosing illness.  
    Both mood and social desirability measures correlate
with wellbeing.   The data demonstrate a high stability of
wellbeing scores over time which would not be expected if
current and presumably transient moods were exerting a
significant causal influence.   It was also found that mood
correlates as highly with wellbeing a week earlier or a week
later suggesting that current mood is a manifestation of
wellbeing rather than a source of response bias (Kammann &amp;
Flett, 1986&semi; Flett, 1986).  
    Correlations between wellbeing and social desirability
tend to be about 0.30 in most studies.   The relatively
small size of the correlation coefficient makes it clear that
subjective wellbeing cannot be equated with social
desirability.  
    It can also be argued that social desirability is
itself a problematic concept.   The desire to appear in a
good light is likely to be confounded with the reality that
one is experiencing the positive aspects of life and achieving
socially desirable goals.   Any individual who is
conscientious, well-adjusted and cooperative is likely to
score highly on social desirability scales.   Costa &amp; McCrae
(1983) present evidence for renaming social desirability and
lie scales as measures of "social adjustment" and suggest that
to interpret correlations with other measures and social
desirability as evidence for invalidity, is unjustified.  
    A related issue here is the claim that people
exaggerate or overestimate their own levels of wellbeing.
  Kammann and Flett (1983b) note that scores on their
measure of wellbeing (Affectometer 2) tend to be skewed with
the mean and median lying more than one standard deviation
above the midpoint of the scale.   This finding is standard
for all measures of wellbeing (Andrews &amp; Withey, 1976&semi;
Campbell, Converse &amp;     Rogers    Rodgers    ,
1976).   Although it has been argued that this indicates
that self reports of wellbeing are therefore exaggerated
and untrustworthy, there is no additional evidence to support
this point of view.   Kammann (1984) argues that it may be
incorrect to assume that people should calculate their
happiness relative to the average level.   Rather, they may
calculate it in terms of an inner scale of experience that
runs from the worst feelings ever experienced to the best
feelings ever experienced and most of the time they are closer
to the favourable endpoint.  
    The relationships between wellbeing and physical
health, sociodemographic variables, stressful life events,
self-esteem and interpersonal relationships are of
considerable interest and will therefore be dealt with under
individual headings.  
        Wellbeing and Physical Health      
    Wellbeing is related to physical health.   A
meta-analysis by Okun et al (1984) examined findings from 81
studies.   Correlations between all physical health measures
(from poor to excellent) and wellbeing were estimated as 0.30
on average (between .29 and .35 at 95% confidence bounds for
zero-order effects).  
    Significant findings were strongest and most
frequently reported for self-reported assessment of physical
health.   Non-significant findings were more often reported
when objective health indices were used, such as the number of
health ailments.   On the other hand, some studies reported
a significant association with objective criteria such as
number of days spent in bed and reduced functional capacity.
  Conflicting findings were reported with respect to the
presence of a recent health problem.   Zautra and Hempel
(1984) discuss the Okun et al., findings and conclude that
while there is clearly a relationship between physical health
and subjective wellbeing, this is probably moderated by
important life style changes associated with changes in health
and/or wellbeing.   They suggest that further research is
necessary to establish the direction and nature of causal
links between these variables.   Personality and social
factors such as methods of coping and social support are seen
as probable moderator variables affecting the impact of
changes in life style on the relation between physical health
and wellbeing.  
    Kammann and Flett 's New Zealand studies also
demonstrate a link between a sense of physical health and
psychological wellbeing, although actual disease and the
presence of diagnosable complaints do not seem to affect
wellbeing (Kammann et al., 1984&semi; Kammann &amp; Flett, 1986&semi; Flett,
1986).   These New Zealand results are in line with those of
Krupinski and McKenzie (1979) in Australia.   Flett
interprets these results using Brickman 's argument (Brickman
et al., 1978) that although major changes such as acute
illness may impact on wellbeing at the time that they occur,
people eventually adapt to all events regardless of their
initial impact.   Thus Flett suggests that the important
health correlate is   "a sense of bodily health and
energy"   which is related to an absence of somatic
complaints.  
        Wellbeing And Socio-Demographic
Indicators      
    In general most of the major studies of wellbeing only
find small associations between wellbeing and demographic
indicators.  
    The meta-analysis by Okun et al (1984) of 81 studies
found that age was an important moderator variable in
increasing the relationship between physical health and
wellbeing.   The mean correlation increased from 0.30 to
0.42 when age was controlled for as, although physical health
deteriorates with age, subjective wellbeing tends to increase.
  Diener (1984), in his review emphasises the
conflicting findings with respect to age but suggests that
older people tend to report more general satisfaction with
most life domains although younger people experience more
intense feelings of both positive and negative affect.
  Larson (1978) in his review of thirty years  '  
research on age and wellbeing concludes that although there is
a decline in the subjective wellbeing of those over the
age of 60, this decline appears to be a product of the other
negative factors that impinge upon the very old such as
decreased health, decreased financial resources, widowhood,
loss of friends and decreased activity.  
    Gender has only been weakly associated with wellbeing
if at all and often the findings are affected by other
variables such as age and partnership status (Diener,
1984).  
    Socio-economic class emerged as a factor which was
linked with both wellbeing and physical health in the Okun et
al., (1984) meta-analysis although they point out that
both income and education proved to be irrelevant variables.
  On the other hand Larson (1978) reports a positive
association between wellbeing and income within countries, a
finding also reported in a review by Easterlin (1974).
  Between country comparisons (Diener, 1984) show weaker
associations while subjective satisfaction with income
produces stronger findings.   These facts lead researchers
to conclude that it is the subjective evaluation of income and
comparisons with others in the immediate social
environment rather than absolute level which is a principal
determinant although this is not to deny the negative
effects of real poverty.   Findings in New Zealand have
shown slight effects at best but the data were collected prior
to the major changes in income differentiation which have
marked the last five years.  
    Employment status has been frequently linked to
wellbeing (Diener, 1984).   Almost all the major studies
show that unemployment causes a marked drop in subjective
wellbeing and that even more marked effects are noted in the
long-term unemployed.   Such findings have been replicated
in New Zealand by Hesketh (1984) and Macky (1987).  
    Social indicator research has often attempted to
define geographical areas which differ in terms of affluence,
privilege and services.   Such studies have helped highlight
issues of poverty and deprivation and have assisted in
targeting services to those most in need.   In 1985 a
Department of Health study (Reinkein et al, 1985) classified
geographical areas throughout New Zealand on the basis of
criteria derived from census information which emerged as a
single factor from a complex multivariate analysis.   A
subset of areas differentiated by the analysis were
described as   "areas of misery"   and
  "pockets of bliss"  .   The indicators include
such variables as income, education, socio-economic status,
being employed, number of cars and race.  
    While such an approach can be practically very useful
in guiding the delivery of social services, there are problems
in assuming an automatic relationship between social indicator
scales based on census variables and subjective wellbeing.
      Calhoun    Colhoun     and others (see
    Calhoun    Colhoun    , 1988&semi; Colhoun &amp;
Maxwell, 1986) surveyed a random sample of people from each of
two   "areas of misery"  , two   "pockets of
bliss"   and three intermediate areas in Dunedin city (n
= 193).   They measured social indicators and also assessed
wellbeing, self-esteem, close relationships and physical
health.   The data showed that although most of the expected
social indicator differences were replicated, there were no
significant overall differences between the areas in
subjective wellbeing or self-esteem.   Nor were the areas
differentiated in general physical health.    
    On the other hand, this study found some evidence of
an association between loneliness, poor physical health, a
lack of close relationships and low income in the
  "areas of misery"   which probably points to the
large numbers of beneficiaries and pensioners who live alone
and whose general circumstances make it difficult for them
to maintain close relationships with others.  
    These results demonstrate that social indicators do
not necessarily predict human happiness.   Geographical
areas can be differentiated in terms of socio-economic
factors.   Some of these factors are indeed linked to
wellbeing and, in this study, were definitely linked to
loneliness.   But while the areas may be poor or rich, they
should not be referred to in terms of bliss and misery as such
terms do not describe the feelings the people themselves
express about their lives.   Poverty can be degrading and it
can make people unhappy but in New Zealand today, the
Department of Health 's   "areas of misery"   are
in need of services and employment opportunities rather than
inaccurate labels that might further reduce the self-esteem of
those who live there.  
        Wellbeing And Stressful
Life-Events      
    Often studies have failed to demonstrate a link
between stressful life events and wellbeing.   This is
partly because many of the studies have selected events that
observers believe will be negative without in fact asking
whether the person experiencing the event has found it so.
  It is also partly because in many studies there has been a
tendency to assess the occurrence of an event without regard
to its recency.  
    Major catastrophes such as becoming a paraplegic, have
not necessarily led to chronically lowered wellbeing but there
is certainly an initial impact (Brickman et al, 1978).
  There is substantial support for the negative effects of
major changes in relationships, such as the breakup of a
partnership, on wellbeing (Kessler et al, 1985&semi; Andrews &amp;
Withey, 1976&semi; Campbell, Converse &amp; Rodgers, 1976).   There
is also support for the impact of hassles in one 's daily life
(Delongis et al, 1985), and as noted earlier, the effects of
unemployment.  
    In New Zealand, Flett (1986) found that negative
events perceived by respondents as involving major failures,
loss of social support and tense times were related to
wellbeing although the effects were not great.   Maxwell &amp;
Robertson (1988) have demonstrated the impact of marital
breakup on wellbeing in a sample of Family Court clients.
  They also report a link between wellbeing and the stress
of life changes, both in terms of the number of changes and
their rated impact.   Replications of the negative effects
of unemployment have already been noted.  
        Wellbeing And Self-Esteem      
    Self-esteem is one of the strongest predictors of
wellbeing (Diener, 1984) and has often been regarded as its
strongest component.   Furthermore self-esteem drops
during periods of unhappiness (Diener, 1984).   Although
self-esteem is related to wellbeing, it is not identical.
  Correlations vary from .35 to .70 depending on the
measures used.  
    Conceptually, self-esteem and wellbeing are both
expressions of satisfaction with aspects of life.
  Self-esteem focusses on satisfaction with self and
wellbeing on overall life satisfaction.   Thus wellbeing is
affected by satisfaction with all aspects of life.
  Satisfaction with oneself has usually been noted as the
most important component.   Campbell (1981) examined
correlations between subjective wellbeing and satisfaction
with various life domains.   The highest correlation was
0.55 with satisfaction with self.   This finding has been
replicated in New Zealand by McIntosh (1985) who found a
correlation of 0.57 between wellbeing and self-esteem in a
sample of 105 university students and by Colhoun (1988) who
found a correlation of 0.41 in a sample of 101 people drawn
randomly from the Dunedin electoral rolls.  
    Satisfaction with work impacts on both wellbeing and
self-esteem.   The relationship between wellbeing and
unemployment has already been discussed above.   Those
studies which also include self-esteem scales show that
self-esteem is lowered by lack of job satisfaction and by
unemployment.   Australasian studies confirm these findings.
  McIntosh (1985) reported that satisfaction with university
work was important for self-esteem, particularly for male
students.   Macky (1987) compared employed and unemployed
school leavers and found that the unemployed were more
depressed and showed lowered self-esteem.   This result is
in line with Australian data (Patton &amp; Noller, 1984).
  Hesketh (1984) studied unemployed adults and found that
the longer people were unemployed, the more likely they were
to be depressed and this was particularly true of the middle
aged unemployed.   Unemployment was also linked to other
negative life circumstances such as family problems and poor
living conditions.   Her work led her to conclude that not
just unemployment but the quality of working conditions
has a very important impact on wellbeing.  
    McIntosh 's 1985 study examined a variety of sources of
self-esteem and wellbeing in a sample of 105 university
students.   She demonstrated that the most important
predictors of self-esteem were satisfaction with university
work, body image, close relationships and the living
environment and those in it.   Body image and leisure
activities were more important for females than males.
  However, if body image is seen as unimportant,
satisfaction with body image is unrelated to self-esteem.
  While self-esteem and wellbeing were related and
responsive to the same factors (r = .57), wellbeing appeared
less vulnerable to differences in satisfaction with various
life domains.  
        Wellbeing and Interpersonal
Relationships      
    Effective social support is the other (with
self-esteem) most important correlate of subjective wellbeing
and has also been seen as an intrinsic part of psychological
health.   The beneficial effects of social support have
become increasingly evident in studies of health and
psychological adjustment (e.g., Brown &amp; Harris, 1978&semi; Thoits,
1982&semi; Wortman, 1984&semi; Kessler et al., 1985 and others).   In
studies of wellbeing, the quality and nature of interpersonal
relationships emerges as the single most important predictor.
  Campbell, Converse and Rodgers (1976) in their
extensive survey of "The Quality of American Life", conclude
that it is   "intimate areas of primary relationships
which have the most potent impact on general feelings of
wellbeing enjoyed by members of the population"  .  
    There are several different aspects of interpersonal
relationships that have been related to wellbeing (Diener,
1984).   Married people are generally reported as happier.
  Satisfaction with one 's love life has also been linked to
wellbeing and so too is having a close confidant.   Greater
amounts of social contact have been found to be associated
with increased wellbeing.   George &amp; Fillenbaum (1985) in
their review of the factors that have proved important in
studies of older people, suggest that wellbeing is related to
all of the three components that have been identified as
comprising social support: the frequency of contact, the
availability of emotional support and tangible assistance
and the perceived quality of relationships.   The key role
of satisfaction rather than amount of contact is emphasised
throughout the social support literature and focusses
attention again on the subjective evaluation of life
circumstances rather than their objective nature.  
    New Zealand studies echo the overseas findings.
  Dixon (1981) confirms that married people tend to be
happier than unmarried.   Flett found small significant
correlations between wellbeing and the total number of people
in the person 's network (r = .21) and the average closeness to
all of them (r = .26).   He found higher correlations
between wellbeing and closeness to the five closest people (r
= .41) and closeness to the closest person (r = .47).
  These results can be compared with the findings from
Colhoun and Maxwell (1985) which used a different methodology.
  They found a correlation between wellbeing and closeness
to the closest person of r = .28.   Wellbeing showed even
higher correlations with overall satisfaction with
relationships, (r = .55) and loneliness (r = -.52).  
    Not only do positive aspects of relationships predict
wellbeing but the absence of close relationships and problems
with relationships predict lowered wellbeing (Clark &amp; Reis,
1988).   Loneliness can be seen as dissatisfaction with
close relationships.   Such a view is reinforced by the
correlations between loneliness and wellbeing.  
    New Zealand studies of general population samples by
Maxwell and Coebergh (1986) and Colhoun (1988) confirm such an
analysis.   Maxwell and Coebergh (1986) found a moderately
high correlation (r = .56) between a scale measuring
"satisfaction with relationships" and a "loneliness" score
derived from a modified version of the UCLA Loneliness scale
(Russell, Peplau &amp; Cutrona, 1980).   Loneliness was most
commonly an outcome of major life changes (including new jobs,
new loves, travel and retirement), the loss of close
relationships (through death, divorce, illness or moving) and
isolating circumstances (spouse and family away, shift work or
isolated living).   All these events can be viewed as
affecting close relationships or making them more difficult to
maintain.   Three other common reasons also relate to the
pattern of social relationships, namely having unhappy close
relationships, getting married or being at home with young
children.   Thus in at least 78% of the cases in the Maxwell
and Coebergh study, the events which precipitated the
loneliest periods in people 's lives can be seen as those that
have affected the pattern of their relationships with
others.  
    Colhoun (1988) surveyed 101 people drawn at random
from the Dunedin electoral rolls.   Her data shows a
correlation of r = -.59 between a scale to measure
"satisfaction with relationships" and a shortened version of
the loneliness scale used by Maxwell and Coebergh.  
    It can be suggested that a "wellness" concept of
satisfaction with relationships is preferable to the
"illness" concept of loneliness and that, like the
relationship between depression and wellbeing, a "satisfaction
with relationships" scale allows for differentiation among
the satisfied while "loneliness" scores tend to discriminate
more strongly among the dissatisfied.  
    It is not only the correlations between scale scores
that support an analysis of loneliness as being part of a more
general concept of relationship satisfaction.   Maxwell
and Coebergh found the best predictors of loneliness were: how
satisfied people felt with their close relationships (r =
.56)&semi; how close people felt to the closest person in their
life (r = .46)&semi; how many people they felt close to (r = .44)
and the amount of contact they had with people at work (r =
.28).   These four variables in combination account for
nearly half the variance (r = .69) in loneliness.   Thus
these findings clearly demonstrate the importance of close
relationships as opposed to just social contact, for feelings
of loneliness.   It is the quality of time spent with others
rather than the quantity which determines satisfaction with
social contact.   It is the closeness of relationships with
others rather than the number which determines satisfaction
with relationships.  
    Satisfaction with close relationships and satisfaction
with social contacts are suggested by Colhoun and Maxwell
(1986) as critical variables that predict mental health
variables.   The social satisfactions are determined by the
nature of social experiences and in particular, contacts with
close friends, number of close friends, closeness to the
closest person and the amount of contact with others during
leisure hours.   The Colhoun and Maxwell paper reports
correlations between loneliness, i.e., a lack of satisfaction
with close relationships, and self-esteem of r = -.38, between
loneliness and depression of r = .52, between loneliness and
social anxiety of r = .44 and as previously reported, a
correlation between loneliness and wellbeing of r =
-.52.  
        Summary and Discussion      
    The research reviewed here indicates that it is
possible to measure subjective wellbeing as an overall
estimate of life satisfaction and as a balance of positive and
negative affect.   Subjective wellbeing is not an artefact
of mood or social desirability.   It is closely correlated
with depression but is a more effective measure as it
discriminates better amongst the non-depressed.   It varies
in response to major life changes such as marital separation
or unemployment.  
    Two other variables emerge as closely linked with
wellbeing but not identical to it.   Both self-esteem and
satisfaction with interpersonal relationships fulfil the
criteria of measures of psychological health in being
demonstrably related to human psychological and social
wellbeing, able to be measured in a global manner, able to be
measured reliably and useful in the sense of being responsive
to major changes in life circumstances.  
    Both self-esteem and satisfying interpersonal
relationships could be regarded as antecedents of subjective
wellbeing, as the latter is the more general concept and
subsumes aspects of the other two in the way in which it is
measured.   We would not disagree with such a proposal at
the general theoretical level but would argue that, at a
practical level, independent measurement of self-esteem
and satisfaction with relationships is highly desirable.
  The studies reviewed here show that certain events impact
more directly on self-esteem (e.g., body image and work
successes) and satisfying relationships (e.g., contact
with close friends and leisure activities).   The
development of a model which views psychological health as
being assessed through subjective scales which are responsive
to objective life conditions and capable of being mediated by
empowering interventions, demands a multi-faceted
conceptualisation of psychological health.   Self-esteem and
satisfying interpersonal relationships will often be the
more direct goal of intervention programmes than global
wellbeing.  
      Another argument for including measures of
self-esteem and relationship satisfaction in psychological
health batteries, is the demonstrable damage brought about by
the events that cause disruption to relationships and loss of
self-esteem.   Also, the association between depression and
suicide and the loss of self-esteem and close relationships
has been amply documented.   Thus self-esteem and effective
interpersonal relationships are appropriate primary goals for
mental health promotion.  
    It could also be suggested that although self-esteem
and satisfying relationships have been identified as
critical aspects of wellbeing, there may also be others.
  We concur with Rodin and others (1982) in acknowledging
the importance of coping skills which should quite rightly
be the proximate targets of intervention programmes.   It is
possible that a generalised measure of coping skill could be
developed, validated, and added to the battery we propose.
  Other possibilities also exist.   Perhaps power and
knowledge are important.   On the other hand, research to
date has failed to demonstrate that these domains make an
impact on subjective wellbeing for most people.   Thus it
does not seem appropriate to select such criteria as the goals
of mental health prevention and promotion or the
interventions of a community psychologist.  
    Thus it is proposed that a scale to measure
psychological health can be derived from measures of
wellbeing, satisfaction with relationships and self-esteem.
  Scales used in the New Zealand research reviewed here can
be obtained from the authors.     