  

    Sealing  
    In 1868 Hatch bought the 17 ton schooner Nancy, which
had been built in Port Adelaide in 1865.   He also fitted
out several cutters all intended for sealing.   It involved
capital input in owning a suitable vessel but the returns
could be very remunerative.   The costs of operating a
vessel were not great and included the salary of a captain,
and the maintenance of hull, sails and rigging.   If the
winds were kind the replacement of sails and rigging was not a
big expense and the driving force, the wind was free.   Crew
were engaged on lays or shares and were paid by results.   A
good season provided an appropriate return to owner and crew.
  In a poor season the crew took their share of the losses
with the owner.  
    In 1872 the Nancy made a voyage to the Auckland
Islands, returning with 150 skins and 3/4 tons of oil.   In
the following year a similar voyage produced 400 skins.
  Soon after this voyage the Nancy was lost when leaving the
New River on another sealing expedition.   In October 1873
Hatch purchased the 45 ton fore and aft rigged schooner
Awarua.   The Awarua was 58 feet in length and had been
built in Bluff in 1871 by the well-known ship builder C. E.
Price.   There is little record of the activities of the
Awarua in the rest of the decade.   In 1873 the government,
in an effort to save the species from extinction, introduced
closed periods for sealing.   This would have been
frustrating to Hatch who with his new and larger vessel was in
a better position to explore the islands of the Southern
Ocean, the area more likely to produce results than the coasts
on the mainland.   However, closed seasons did not mean much
to the unscrupulous.   Once a vessel left port it was
unlikely to be heard of again until it returned.   The
oceans were wide and the government had only one small sailing
vessel, the Kekeno, policing the sealing regulations.   That
Joseph Hatch was not averse to a little poaching can be judged
from the prosecution of Captain Drew of the Awarua in February
1880 for sealing out of season.   Fortunately for Drew and
probably Hatch, the prosecution failed because of a
technicality.  
    In 1886 Hatch spent some &pound;650
preparing the Awarua for sealing and as he was a member of the
House of Representatives it is reasonable to assume he had
some indication of government policy.   If he was given the
nod, it turned out to be wrong, for in April the government
extended the closed season for a further year.    
    Late in the year the Awarua, as a result of
representations made to the government by the Invercargill
Chamber of Commerce, sailed to the Auckland Islands to report
on the seal population and related matters.   The report
indicated little increase in the seal population and in view
of the scarcity there was little point in providing
protection.   In April 1887 the government extended the
closed season for sealing a further year.   Following this
announcement, Hatch announced his intention to despatch
the Awarua to Bass Strait, where no sealing restrictions
existed.   A sealing gang of Maoris and half-castes under
George Howell as headsman was recruited.   The names of the
party were Tommy Fat, Denis Fox, Mabelle Wood, Charles Brown,
Te Kooti and one Murphy.   Denis Fox was to enter Hatch 's
life on several occasions and always with serious
repercussions.   The Awarua sailed on the 22nd of June 1887.
  Hatch 's announcement that the Awarua was to seal in Bass
Strait was viewed with some cynicism and derision by some of
the locals, who, knowing Hatch considered it more likely its
destination was the Southern Oceans, a much more likely area.
  That this suspicion was held by other than locals, is
illustrated by the Marine Department advising their
counterpart in Hobart of the Awarua 's departure.   They were
asked to report her presence     "as it was
considered advisable to ascertain her movement as Seal
Fishery in this colony is closed at present."      
    The Awarua first called at Riverton and finally
cleared Stewart Island on the 6th of July and four days later
sailed into Port Ross in the Auckland
    Island    Islands     having gone in the
completely opposite direction to their announced destination.
  Their arrival at such a remote place would probably not
have come under notice in normal circumstances but to their
surprise they were greeted on arrival by eight survivors of
the barque Derry Castle.   The Derry Castle survivors had
been on the island some three months and were jubilant at
being found.   Their jubilation would not have been shared
by Captain Drew of the Awarua.   To him the castaways were
an acute embarrassment and one he could not walk away
from.  
    The Derry Castle had sailed from Geelong, Victoria on
the 13th of March 1887 with a cargo of wheat for Falmouth.
  One week out in thick, stormy weather the ship struck a
reef off Enderby Island at the north eastern extremity of the
Auckland Islands.   The ship quickly broke up and all aboard
were either washed overboard or threw themselves into the sea.
  With daylight the survivors, seven crew and one passenger
found themselves on a remote, desolate island with little
clothing, no food and no fire.   Their first task was to
bury the bodies of their shipmates who had been washed ashore.
  The survivors were on a small island close to the entrance
to Port Ross.   Clearly visible on the mainland was the
building, housing the depot maintained for shipwrecked
sailors.   It was a tantalizing prospect but the survivors
had no means of crossing the comparatively short stretch of
sea intervening.  
    It was possible to contrive some crude shelter and
food in the form of shellfish etc was available, but survival
in the harsh climate and the circumstances they found
themselves in was impossible without fire.   Great hopes
were pinned on a box of matches which was found.   They were
carefully dried but hopes sank as one by one they refused to
light.   When all seemed lost, James McGhie, the passenger,
found a revolver cartridge in his pocket and after much
careful preparation a fire was lit by exploding the powder it
contained.   With fire the eight managed a miserable
existence but there was no prospect of reaching the depot
until some thirteen weeks after the wreck an old axehead was
found.  
    Port Ross had been the site of Enderby 's &amp; Co 's
settlement which was formed by the arrival of three hundred
people in December 1849.   Their leader, Mr Charles Enderby,
was appointed Resident Commissioner and his importance was
added to by being appointed Lieutenant Governor by the
British government.   Buildings were erected to house
the colony and the settlement was named Hardwicke.   Life in
the Auckland Islands was hard and the experiment was a dismal
failure.   By 1852 the colony had been abandoned.   It was
to this experiment in colonization that the Derry Castle
survivors could thank for the axehead, which in turn enabled
them to fashion a crude punt to cross the straits to reach the
depot.   This they accomplished on the 18th of June 1887
where they found the luxuries of a building, a boat, clothing,
blankets, some food and cooking utensils, axes, matches and
fishing lines.   After life on Enderby Island living at the
depot on the mainland was equivalent to a holiday at Club
Med.  
    For Captain Drew it was one thing to have the
tremendous satisfaction of rescuing fellow seamen in distress
and another to have a costly and risky poaching expedition
ruined.   He could have immediately returned to New Zealand
with the survivors and this would seem to have been the safest
option.   Instead, he decided to go on with the sealing
venture and the Derry Castle survivors, who had little option,
agreed to assist.  
    The sealing was not very successful.   Finally
Captain Drew decided to give up and  , obviously with a
view to covering his tracks, headed for Melbourne where the
Awarua arrived in late September.   The arrival was the
first indication of the loss of the Derry Castle.   This
together with rescue of the eight survivors was big news.
  Captain Drew and his crew were treated as heroes and a
relief fund was immediately established.   In a short time
the public subscribed &pound;223.15.0 which was
matched by &pound;150.0.0 by the government.   In
October it was decided to distribute the amount in the
following way:
  table    
    Passenger McGhie was, for some reason, not included in
the distribution.   About the same time, the Victorian
Customs advised the New Zealand authorities that 176 seal
skins had been found on the Awarua.  
    The news of the arrival of the Awarua at Melbourne was
received in Invercargill on the 22nd of September 1887 just
twenty four hours before Joseph Hatch was to make his last
speech before the election in which he was seeking a further
term in parliament.   His final meeting with an attendance
of over 1 000 people was a disaster, with continual uproar,
interjections and questions about the activities of the Awarua
which could not be adequately answered.   Almost certainly
the news of the Awarua cost him the election.   There had
been some talk when the Awarua left on a sealing expedition
during the closed season in New Zealand and the news that the
vessel had rescued castaways at the Auckland Islands when it
was due to operate in Bass Strait was too much to swallow.
  The lame excuses of strong northerly weather and having to
pick up a boat at Port Ross were not accepted.   Much to his
disappointment Hatch was third out of five candidates.   The
results were:
  table    
    Hatch showed his frustration and disappointment at the
official declaration of the poll when in his address, instead
of the traditional acceptance of a democratic election, he set
out to blame his defeat on the Returning Officer, Mr A. C.
Henderson.   It was a cowardly attack on an official who was
not in the position to reply.   In a typically long tirade
Hatch indicated that the electors had voted fair and square
but not so as far as the Returning Officer was concerned -
    "he was no more fit for the position as a dog in
the street."       As Hatch had thrown doubts on
the impartiality of the Returning Officer, Henderson took a
case against him for slander, claiming damages of
&pound;1000.   The case was heard before the end
of the year by Mr Justice Ward and a special jury.   It
attracted tremendous interest.   That Hatch took the case
seriously is shown by his choice of Sir Robert Stout as his
counsel.   Sir Robert, a fellow prohibitionist, was a former
Prime Minister and a future Chief Justice.   He was probably
the most prominent barrister in the country.   Despite the
skill of Sir Robert and the calling of some twelve witnesses
the jury took a mere twenty minutes to decide that Hatch 's
words were said with malicious intent.   They awarded
Henderson &pound;50 damages with costs making
Hatch 's outburst extremely expensive.  
    Early in December 1887 the Awarua returned to Bluff
and shortly after Lewis Frederick Drew, Master, and Denis Fox,
Mate, were brought before the court charged with killing seals
in a closed season and having 176 seal skins in their
possession.   The case was heard by Mr H. McCulloch,
Resident Magistrate and Mr J. L. McDonald J. P.   Fox was
charged with the offences and Drew charged with being an
accessory.   Fox said in court that Hatch and Drew had
profited by the rescue of the Derry Castle survivors because
of the award from the relief fund, whereas he had not, and it
was unfair he was charged as the principal offender.   Hatch
in evidence said he found the vessel and food and paid the
master &pound;10 per month, the profit on skins
obtained to be divided in agreed proportions between owner and
crew.   He had given specific instructions to the master to
seal in Bass Strait and not to breach the closed season in New
Zealand territory.   Drew in evidence confirmed Hatch 's
instructions.   Both men were convicted with Fox being fined
&pound;5 for killing one seal and Drew fined
&pound;40 for being an accessory and
&pound;10 for seals killed.   Though Drew had
received exactly the amount he was fined from the relief fund,
he chose to serve a sentence of six months rather than pay the
fine.   Whatever the reason for Drew 's choice his case
aroused public sympathy resulting in a petition to the
government to have his sentence reduced.   Hatch on the
other hand was considered the villain of the piece and treated
accordingly.  
    That he had been unfair to Drew was illustrated in
June 1888 when Drew, recently released from gaol, took a case
against Hatch for unpaid wages.   The claim was for
&pound;54.7.8, Hatch counterclaiming
&pound;117.16.6 for goods supplied, cash lent and
moneys paid.   The Magistrate Mr H. McCulloch found that the
wages claimed were due but that despite some very conflicting
and unreliable evidence on the part of Hatch, that the
counterclaim must succeed to the extent of
&pound;41.13.4.   Judgement for Drew for
&pound;12.13.4 and costs &pound;2.1.0
was given.  
    After the court case Hatch resorted to his great
standby of a public meeting to defend his actions.   Hatch
hired Sloan 's Theatre and issued an invitation to the public
to hear his side of a controversy which had kept tongues
wagging in Invercargill for almost a year.   Some 1500
accepted the invitation.  
    Getting a chairman was a problem, the Mayor declining
as he did not consider the meeting an ordinary public one.
  Several names were suggested but they were either
unwilling or not acceptable to Mr. Hatch.   Eventually Mr N.
Johnson was nominated and accepted.  
    Mr Hatch thereupon launched into a long address giving
his side of the voyage of the Awarua and the subsequent events
using his     elequence    eloquence     to defend
the indefensible.   During his address Hatch was frequently
interrupted and contradicted by Captain Drew and others, while
at intervals the audience loudly and emphatically expressed
their disbelief of his explanations.   At the conclusion of
the address it was moved and seconded from the floor that
    "In the opinion of this meeting Mr Hatch 's
explanations are not satisfactory and it is the duty of
the government to take proceedings against him for seal
poaching and perjury."       The chairman duly put
the motion but the voices were so nearly equal he was unable
to decide the issue.   On asking for a show of hands he
declared the motion, lost.   The declaration was received
with mingled applause and dissent.   When Hatch came forward
to propose a vote of thanks to the chairman, he was received
with hooting and noise.  
    Consideration was given to charging Hatch with perjury
but as Captain Drew, even after his quarrel with Hatch, still
agreed he had not been instructed to go to the Aucklands, no
case could be made.  
      Later in the year Hatch was again in trouble over
seal skins.   The Awarua arrived at Bluff with 78 skins on
board which Hatch maintained were obtained from Bass Strait.
  The customs pointed out that under the Fisheries Act of
1884 all skins were treated as being illegally taken unless it
could be proved to the contrary.   The vessel was held by
the Customs until Hatch could prove the origin of the skins
and he was permitted to land them only on payment of the
expenses in seizing them.   The following month Hatch must
have convinced Customs as the amount charged was
refunded.      
  

        HISTORY    
      Discovery    
    The first of the five island groups to be discovered
by Europeans was the Bounty Islands, by Captain William Bligh
of the mutiny on the   Bounty   fame.   On 9 September
1788, he came across   "a cluster of small rocky
islands"   which he named   "after the ship, the
  Bounty Isles  "  .   Then on 23 November 1791,
unbeknown to each other, Captain George Vancouver of   the
Discovery   and Lieutenant Broughton of the
  Chatham   discovered The Snares on the same day.  
    On 26 March 1800, Captain Waterhouse of the
  Reliance   sighted a group of islands, which because
of their approximation to the antipodes of London, he named
the "Penantipodes".  
    The Auckland Islands, which like the other islands may
have been known to early Maori, were not discovered by
Europeans until 1806.   On 18 August that year, Captain
Abraham Bristow of the whaler   Ocean   sighted a group
of islands which he named   "Lord Auckland 's (my friend
through my father)"  .  
    The last of the five island groups, Campbell Island,
was discovered on 4 January 1810, by Captain Frederick
Hasselburgh of the sealer   Perseverance   who named it
after Robert Campbell, the owner of his sealing company.
  Sadly Hasselburgh drowned in Perseverance Harbour, and by
an extraordinary coincidence 19 years later the
  Perseverance   itself was wrecked in the same
harbour.  
    Following their discovery there was a rush of sealers
to these subantarctic islands.   With the wholesale
slaughter of seals the sealers soon all but exterminated their
means of livelihood.  
      Antarctic Explorers    
    During the year 1840, three famous Antarctic explorers
were to anchor in Port Ross in the Auckland Islands.   First
to arrive was the American Charles Wilkes in the
  Porpoise  .   He found the harbour an excellent one
to replenish his wood and water, while his crew
  "enjoyed themselves on chowders and
fries"  .  
    Only two days after Wilkes, the French expedition
under Dumont D'Urville entered the harbour in the
  Astrolabe   and   Zelee  .   Interestingly
D'Urville found the graves of some early whalers on Shoe
Island in the harbour and his artist Breton leaves us a fine
painting of the island with the two ships anchored
alongside.  
    But by far the most significant of the three
expeditions was the visit of the English naval vessels HMS
  Erebus   and HMS   Terror   under the command of
Captain James Ross (later Sir James).   On board were the
two botanists Joseph (later Sir Joseph) Hooker and Dr David
Lyall who collected 80 flowering plants, including the
magnificent megaherbs and many species that had never been
described before.   Later, he was to publish the collection
in his classic   Flora Antarctica.      
  photo  
  caption  
    Impressed by what later became known as Port Ross,
James Ross carried out a hydrographic survey of the harbour.
  Then before departing he released several animals,
including sheep, pigs, poultry and rabbits, and also planted a
variety of vegetables and garden fruits as food for
castaways.  
      Hardwicke    
    Fired by James Ross 's report of an excellent harbour
at Port Ross and that it would serve as an ideal whaling base
for the whole southern region, Charles Enderby of the British
whaling company, Samuel Enderby &amp; Son, determined to found a
whaling settlement at Port Ross.   In doing so he unwisely
accepted, without question, the glowing account of Benjamin
Morrell who following a visit in 1829, reported that the
  "Auckland 's Island is one of the finest places for a
settlement.     There are very few spots that could not be
converted to excellent pasturage or tillage land  "  .
  Without bothering to check for himself the gullible
Enderby went ahead with his plans to found a settlement at
Erebus Cove, Port Ross.     "The Auckland Islands are
exceedingly healthy"  , he enthused in his prospectus,
  "and have a very rich virgin soil"  .
    "  The settler will be free from aboriginals,
there being none on the island."      
    We can imagine the surprise of the settlers when they
arrived in Port Ross in December 1849 to find over sixty Maori
and Moriori already occupying the land.   The Maori-Moriori
party under Chief Matioro had arrived from the Chatham Islands
in 1842, a whole eight years previously.   If the truth be
known the Maori probably were pleased to see the British
colonists as this meant work and money.   A large house was
erected for Enderby who had been elevated to the status of
Lieutenant-Governor.   Barracks, a storehouse, a jail (on
Shoe Island), a chapel and cottages for the settlers were also
built.   On New Year 's Day 1850 the settlement was formally
named Hardwicke in honour of the Earl of Hardwicke, the
Governor of the company.  
    But things soon began to go very wrong for the
idealist, Charles Enderby.   Vegetables and crops failed to
grow in the acid, peaty soil and too few whales were being
caught to provide the income for the colony.   In November
1850 the New Zealand Governor, Sir George Grey, arrived to pay
an official visit, but he left feeling pessimistic about the
settlement 's future.   By late 1851 the parent company in
England was becoming deeply concerned about the total lack of
revenue from whaling, and two Special Commissioners were sent
out to inquire into the affairs of the establishment, and if
necessary close the station down.   The
Lieutenant-Governor resisted vehemently at first their efforts
to relieve him of his position, but finally complied and
returned to England.   By 1852 the last of the settlers had
departed.  
    Today the only two buildings at Erebus Cove are the
derelict boatshed and castaway depot, both built after the
settlement was abandoned.   The boatshed is known as the
"Erebus Cove Museum" and contains relics collected from around
the Auckland Island group.   Further along the coast in the
rata forest are the remains of the hut sites and cobbled paths
of Hardwicke.   The "Victoria Tree" was carved during a
visit by HMCS   Victoria   in a search for castaways and
the flagstaff was erected by the   Amherst   to replace
the original Hardwicke flagmast.   Half of the known graves
in the Hardwicke cemetery are those of shipwrecked mariners.
  The most poignant reminder of the settlement is the
headstone of Isabel Younger who died on 19 November 1850, aged
three months.  
      Shipwrecks    
    With the notable exception of the
  Perseverance   and two ships lost on the Antipodes
Islands, most shipwrecks occurred on the Auckland Islands.
  At least eight ships ended their days on the rugged reefs
and cliffs of the Auckland Islands and over 100 lives were
lost.   But it is the accounts of the survivors and how they
eked out an existence on these cold inhospitable islands until
rescue finally came that stir the heart.  
        Grafton      
    The   Grafton   was driven aground in Carnley
Harbour during a violent storm in January 1864.   Captain
Thomas Musgrave and his four companions all managed to
struggle ashore and for over a year they lived in a crude hut
which they called "Epigwaitt" (Indian for "dwelling by
water").   Fortunately they were able to save the ship 's
dinghy and Musgrave, Raynal (a French adventurer) and one of
the crew set out on an epic voyage to Stewart Island, which
they reached safely five days later.   Barely recovered,
Musgrave returned in the rescue ship to pick up the two
remaining castaways.  
        Invercauld      
    The   Invercauld   was wrecked on the western
cliffs of Auckland Island in May 1864.   Nineteen of the
crew of 25 managed to get ashore but only Captain Dalgarno,
the first mate and a seaman were to survive the year that
followed.   They were eventually picked up from Enderby
Island by the Spanish brig   Julian  .   John Mahoney,
the second mate, was buried in the cemetery at Hardwicke where
his tombstone can be seen today.  
        General Grant      
    Probably the most famous wreck of all was the
  General Grant   which in 1866 drifted into a cavern in
the western cliffs of Auckland Island.   The foremast was
driven through the hull when it struck the roof of the cavern
and 68 people drowned as the ship sank.   The 15 survivors
set out in two of the ship 's boats for Disappointment Island
where they rested for two days before continuing on to Port
Ross.   In a desperate bid four men set out in an open boat
to seek help but were never seen again.   The remaining
castaways were eventually rescued by the   Amherst   in
1868.   Over the years there have been a number of searches
for the remains of the   General Grant   and the gold
that she was carrying, but so far without success.  
        Derry Castle      
    The   Derry Castle   was wrecked on the north
coast at Enderby Island in 1887.   Only eight of the
complement of 23 were able to make it to the shore and the
dead were buried in a mass grave.   For a time the survivors
lived in tussock huts which they built on the island.
  Later they constructed a punt to cross to the castaway hut
at Erebus Cove, where they were eventually found by the sealer
  Awarua  .   The figurehead from the   Derry
Castle,   which for a time stood over the mass grave, is
now in the Canterbury Museum.   The punt has recently been
brought out to the Southland Museum.  
        Dundonald      
    The barque   Dundonald   was wrecked on the
coast at Disappointment Island in 1907.   Twelve of the crew
were drowned in the surf but the survivors erected grass huts
where they existed through the winter.   Then becoming
desperate, they constructed a flimsy 
  photo  
  caption  
coracle out of branches in which they were able to cross to
the mainland and reach the depot at Erebus Cove.   They were
eventually rescued by the   Hinemoa   and the coracle
was brought out to the Canterbury Museum.   Jabez Peters,
the mate, lies buried in the Hardwicke cemetery.  
    After the earlier wrecks, castaway huts were erected
on all the New Zealand subantarctic islands and these were
serviced regularly by the government steamers up till 1927.
  Today the oldest of these huts still standing is the
Stella Hut at Sandy Bay on Enderby Island.   Built in 1880
by Captain McKenzie of the   Stella   it replaced an
earlier hut destroyed by fire.  
      Farming    
        Auckland Islands      
    In 1894 the Auckland Islands were divided into three
pastoral runs and offered for lease.   But only W. J.
Moffett took up his lease and in 1895 
  photo  
  caption  
he landed nine cattle and 20 sheep on Enderby Island.
  However, in 1900, G. S. Fleming established a homestead in
Carnley Harbour and landed 2,000 sheep there.   But the
sheep gradually perished and Fleming forfeited his lease in
1910.   In 1934 the whole island group was reserved for the
preservation of the flora and fauna.   The remainder of
Moffett 's wild cattle on Enderby Island are being removed.  
        Campbell Island      
    With less scrub and more tussockland, Campbell Island
proved to be a better proposition for farming than the
Auckland Islands.   In 1895 J. Gordon took up his lease of
Campbell Island for a sheep run.   Building a homestead and
woolshed at Tucker Cove in Perseverance Harbour he released
300-400 sheep on the island.   In 1900 he sold out to
Captain W. H. Tucker but remained on as manager.   With 
  photo  
  caption: Sealing on Campbell Island...  
help from the shore whalers during their off season, sheep
farming continued on Campbell Island up till 1931.   4,000
sheep and a few cattle were abandoned on the island.   It
was declared a nature reserve in 1954, and in 1970 and 1984
dividing fences were erected across the island to restrict the
destruction of the flora by animals.   The remaining wild
sheep were removed in 1990.   The site of the homestead and
woolshed is still evident at Tucker Cove.  
      Shore Whaling    
    With the decline of whaling in Cook Strait and the
offer of work on Tucker 's station a party of Tory Channel
whalers under Jack Norton set up a whaling station at
Northwest Bay on Campbell Island in 1909.   Using an open
whaleboat the party caught 13 whales in the first season and
hauled them ashore by capstan in Capstan Cove.   They
continued to hunt with success up to 1916 when the whole
complement of the station, including the five Norton brothers,
enlisted for the First World War.   The remains of the
capstan can still be seen at Capstan Cove.  
    Following Norton 's success H. F. Cook from the Bay of
Islands established a whaling station at North East Harbour on
Campbell Island in 1911.   Like Norton 's station, Cook 's
party caught 13 whales in their first season but the station
closed down with the advent of the First World War in 1914.
  Three trypots and other relics can still be seen at the
head of North East Harbour.  
      The Scientists    
    Both Germany and France sent expeditions to the New
Zealand subantarctic islands to observe the transit of Venus
in 1874.   The Germans chose the Auckland Islands and set up
their observatory at Terror Cove in Port Ross.   They were
lucky and the clouds cleared at the critical time of the
transit before closing in again.   The three brick pillars
used for mounting their instruments remain at Terror Cove.  
    The French sent their expedition in the   Vire  
(Captain J. Jacquemart) to Campbell Island where they
established their observatory at Venus Cove in Perseverance
Harbour.   But they were unlucky and only caught a glimpse
of Venus as it began to cross the sun.   Nevertheless they
made a thorough survey of the island and a number of their
French place-names will be found on the map.   Although the
grave of M. Duris, who had died on the expedition and was
buried on Point Duris, has not been found, the remains of the
observation station can be seen at Venus Cove.  
    Over the years many eminent scientists have visited
and studied the islands: Sir James Hector, Thomas Kirk, Sir
William Benham, Leonard Cockayne, Sir Charles Fleming and Sir
Robert Falla, to mention but a few.   The last two were
members of the famous "Cape Expedition" which was sent to
coastwatch in the islands during the Second World War.
Warned by the German Government that war was imminent the
German steamer   Erlangen   slipped quietly out of
Dunedin Harbour in late August 1939.   But Captain Grams had
only five     days      days'       fuel
aboard and he headed for the Auckland Islands in the hope of
finding firewood.   Rata logs were cut and loaded aboard in
Carnley Harbour and the   Erlangen   continued on her
way.   After the incident it was decided to mount a coastal
watch in the islands and volunteers were called for.   A
number of leading scientists were included in the party Which
was given the code name of "Cape Expedition".   The
expedition was taken down in the   Tagua   in 1941 and
coast watching stations were established at Tagua Bay in
Carnley Harbour, Ranui Cove at Port Ross and Tucker Cove in
Perseverance Harbour.   The ketch   Ranui   was
provided to act as a link between the stations.  
    Although the watch was discontinued at the end of the
war the Tucker Cove base was kept open to act as a weather
station.   But the base had been deliberately built back
from the harbour to avoid detection and was in an unsuitable
position for a modern scientific base.   A new station was
therefore constructed on Beeman Point and was opened in 1957.
  Today the three "Cape Expedition" stations are
derelict.    
  

          THE END OF COLD STORAGE ON THE
AUCKLAND WATERFRONT      
    by D.A Rae    
    With the introduction of container shipping, it became
evident that redundancy must eventually face the massive cold
storage buildings of the Auckland   Farmers'   Freezing
Co-operative Ltd (AFFCO) which, with various additions over
the years, have dominated the Eastern Reclamation of the
Auckland waterfront since 1883.  
    Right now it is much easier to load a container at the
dairy factory itself and transport it direct to the container
terminal in Auckland than to go to all the trouble of
transferring the dairy produce, first to a
    coal    cool      printing error according
to author   store for grading, freezing and storage, then
finally     leading    loading      printing
error according to author   it out to a shipping
container.  
    Many dairy factories now have their own cool stores
and freeze and store their own produce.   The grading is
done at the factory under a system of
    surveilance    surveillance     by the
Ministry of Agriculture, instead of, as before, all at a
central port cool store.  
    Consequently, the complex of buildings on the approach
to the Kings Wharf, variously dating
  photo  
from 1883, 1915, 1918, 1925, 1932 and 1934 have already been
razed to the ground along with the old Kings Wharf coal fired
power station which adjoined them.  
    The 1939 AFFCO building on the approach to the
Bledisloe Wharf (first named the Export Wharf in
1939    &semi;    )     still stands, but its many
floors of storage space are unrefrigerated and empty.   The
Auckland Harbour Board, and now presumably the Auckland
Regional Council as its successor, is equally bent on seeing
this building demolished as soon as leasehold contracts
allow.  
    As these historic Kings Wharf buildings which occupied
such an important place in the economy of the Auckland
Province will soon be not even a memory, the photographs which
follow will go some way to keeping a record of their
beginnings, their peak development, and their final
destruction.  
    The first picture showing the 1883 building standing
alone, comes from the Winkelmann collection of the
Auckland Institute and Museum.   It had been tentatively
dated as c.1920 in the collection but this was manifestly
incorrect as the first addition to this building (to double
its size) was made in 1915.  
    In Journal no.24 of April 1974, when the same
photograph accompanied an article on "The birth of the Meat
Export Trade", the then editor had estimated the date as about
1913.  
    However, the author has in his possession a photograph
of the Roughriders departing for the Boer War from the Kings
Wharf and marching past the 1883 building.   All the
surrounding area is identical in every detail, even to the
positions of the same small craft lying alongside the wharf,
so the conclusion must be that the true date is 1900.  
    At this date, the 1883 building is in its exact
original form as designed by the architects, Messrs Coxon and
Jackson of Auckland and Christchurch.   It is not, however
in its first glow of optimism!   The ill-fated first Company
- "New Zealand Frozen Meat and Storage Company" - had
over-extended itself to erect a structure too elaborate for a
fledgling industry and was already in considerable trouble at
the end of its first year of trading.  
    The article in Journal no.24 names the directors and
calls them the Auckland commercial aristocracy of the
time, as indeed they were.   But by the time that this
photograph was taken, many of them had suffered the same fate
as the Company
  photo  
which was wound up in 1889, with the shareholders losing
all their capital.  
    There is, in fact, a striking similarity (though on a
smaller scale), between these high-flyers of the 1880s and the
high-flyers of our recent 1980s.   In both cases, a building
boom at the beginning of the decade was followed by a
resounding crash towards the end.  
    A second company - "The Auckland Freezing Co. Ltd",
formed in 1889, acquired the assets at a "fire sale" price in
the same year and limped along until 1903 when it also folded.
  Stability came to the industry only with the founding of
"The Auckland   Farmers'   Freezing Co. Ltd" by a group of
Waikato farmers in 1903 and this company has survived to this
day.   In spite of many vicissitudes over the years, it has
grown beyond the wildest dreams of its founders and in 1990
will be the dominant meat processor for the whole of the North
Island.  
    A point of interest in the photographs of the original
Kings Wharf building, is the number of opening windows in the
facade.   At that stage of the building 's life, activities
such as cooking, canning and can making, as well as offices
and maintenance workshops required a good deal of
unrefrigerated space.   At a later date, the use of the
building exclusively as a cool store for dairy produce meant
that the windows were bricked up and although the mouldings
were still there, the blank facade is what remains in the
memories of most older Aucklanders.  
    The second picture shows AFFCO 's Auckland waterfront
buildings at the peak of their development and activity in
1963.  
    The old ornate 1883 building is in the centre
foreground, flanked by somewhat plainer "red-brick" additions
to right and left.   Immediately behind this row are two
taller blocks in     start    stark      printer
error according to author   reinforced concrete.   Then,
in the left foreground is the yellow coloured "Art Deco
    Periond    Period    " building known to the
company 's staff as "The Civic" from its resemblance to the
style of the Civic Theatre.  
    The railway line and the harbour breastwork formed
after the demolition of the old J.J. Craig store runs past the
"Civic" and the Kings Wharf power station and leads on to the
seven floored 1939 AFFCO building on the approach to the
Bledisloe Wharf.   In front of it are the single storeyed
ice room and workshops on each side of the rail yard.
  Further on again is the "temporary" war time annexe which
was still in place long after the war ended.  
    The main 1939 building can be seen to be connected to
the Bledisloe wharf by the overhead conveyor from the sixth
floor straddling the railway line.  
    At the end of the vista comes the French Street milk
powder store with its three gables and
    venitlators    ventilators    
    onthe    on the     approach to the Jellicoe
Wharf.  
    Altogether, an almost continuous sweep of Affco owned
buildings round the perimeter of the roadway and rail tracks
shown in the photograph.  
    The 1939 building had the Company 's Head Office and a
certain amount of recreational space on top of the six
refrigerated storeys.   As the Head Office called for a
certain amount of prestige, the resulting design was for the
most elegant cool store in the country, which it still
remains, though under the threat of demolition.  
    The conveyor to the Bledisloe wharf which was put in
place with such high hopes of quick and efficient loading, was
used only for a period during the 1951 waterfront strike when
the army was called in to load the ships.   For the rest of
its life it remained out of action - a memorial of union power
of obstruction.  
    From the time the 1939 building was occupied, a great
problem arose from pollution from the Kings wharf power
station on a scale that would never be tolerated today.
  Great piles of cinders accumulated in the yards and on the
roof of the building and swirled around in every wind.
  This was a particular trial to the butter graders on the
ground floor who were trying to keep up high standards for the
export produce in the gritty
  photo  
atmosphere.   On the top floor, the windows were sealed and
the early type of air conditioning was supposed to be dust
proof, but the cinders got into the ducts and large black
circles soon appeared around all the vents.   "Cinder in the
eye" was an occupational hazard for all the staff and hardly a
day passed without     called    a
call      printer error according to author   for the
volunteer ambulance man with the Optrex bottle.  
    In time the chimney emissions were modified, but the
trouble was never fully solved until the station stopped
generating.  
    The French Street store still stands but is not owned
by AFFCO at the present day and is used for purposes
unconnected with dairy produce.  
    Picture no. 3 shows the Kings Wharf "red-brick"
frontages immediately prior to their demolition in May
1973.  
    At this stage, the facades had been shorn of most of
their decorative stonework and their parapets had been
removed.  
    A few years before, an ominous crack
    and    had     developed in the brickwork of
the 1918 "cheese store" next to   Hellabys'   building and
pieces of masonry had begun to fall from the 1883 building on
to the street below.  
    When a substantial piece narrowly missed the Union
delegate standing outside, remedial action, which had been put
off while only the general public
    as    was     at risk, became a matter of
urgent necessity!  
    Consequently, much of the character of the older
buildings had been lost before they were swept away.  
    Picture nos 4 and 5 show the actual act of
    demoliton    demolition     of the "red-brick"
blocks in 1973 - the
  photos  
  caption  
action of the swinging lead ball making short work of the
brickwork.  
    Picture no. 6 shows some of the very substantial
reinforced concrete buildings which remained on the Kings
Wharf     approached    approaches      printer
error according to author   after the older buildings had
gone.   These blocks, which could have stood for another 100
years, were to prove a much more difficult task for the
demolition hammers when they too had to go in 1988.   Even a
fire that broke out during the course of the demolition didn't
help very much, and the great steel columns put up a long
resistance.  
    However, during their remaining life, these buildings
were tidied and painted and a striking mural was designed by
the AFFCO architect, Mr L.F. Hodgkinson and became a downtown
landmark from 1975 to 1987 when the project to clear the
whole area began.  
    Now nothing remains on the Kings Wharf site and we
have the nearest thing to a "level playing field" that our
politicians are so obsessed with!    
        REGAINING STEAM    
    RAILWAY ARCHEOLOGY IN NEW ZEALAND  
    MANY readers will have fond memories of the steam
locomotive era.   When it came to an end around 1970,
something that had been a constant for many years went out of
our lives.   The something was hard to define but there is
little doubt that the passing of this distinctive form of
motive power represented one of the milestones of the
twentieth century.  
    Having played such an important part in our
development over one hundred years, it was sad to see
remaining locomotives meet their fate under the scrapper 's
torch.   Indeed they were cut up with almost
indecent   caption    photo   haste, almost as
if the powers-that-were were afraid to leave them intact.  
    The small band of railway enthusiasts of the time
watched as hundreds of locomotives disappeared forever.
  Very few had the means to do anything to save the large
and heavy locomotives.   Fortunately a small but significant
number escaped, purchased at the eleventh hour by various
individuals and syndicates.   Others found their way into
playgrounds, a few into museums.   The New Zealand Railways
even retained about ten for a variety of reasons.  
    Gradually various "preservation groups" evolved over
the past twenty years with, today, nearly thirty such groups
spread fairly evenly around the country.   Some are highly
developed such as the Glenbrook Vintage Railway, Steam
Incorporated, and the Pleasant Point Railway.  
    Today about 126 steam locomotives are known to
survive, the majority in the hands of the preservation groups.
  Seventy six are ex New Zealand railways while the
remaining 50 are mostly small industrial types&semi; formerly
working at sawmills, freezing and fertiliser works.   About
30 of the large railways "tender" type can still be found
including seven of the big K, KA and KB classes.  
    Surprisingly nearly 50 are either in operating
condition or under overhaul, the result of years of dedicated
restoration work by small bands of enthusiasts.   Main line
steam running is once again with us&semi; the impossible dream of a
few years ago.   The sight of steam hauled excursion trains
is becoming a more common sight, with groups highly
organised.  
    But there are other steam locomotives around that
are not included in the above tally.   Not easily found,
they do exist&semi; many dumped to form river and sea protection
against the erosion of banks supporting railway lines.   For
decades they have been ignored however a small group of
enthusiasts have put in a lot of time locating such dump sites
and recording the locomotives and equipment.  
      Many were dumped well before the age of steam came
to an end for the NZR, being disposed of between 1925 and 1940
during a major "cleanup" of the locomotive fleet.   In the
ten years leading up to 1930 no fewer than 14 classes of
locomotive disappeared entirely from the tracks.   A
further 12 classes were severely depleted.   By 1940 most of
these had also disappeared.  
    Where did they go?   The demand for scrap metal in
those interwar years appears not to have been great and while
some were simply stripped of usable parts, many were just
towed and dumped in a river or along a troublesome foreshore
where erosion threatened the line or railway yards.
  Sometimes almost a train of condemned engines
  photo  
were disposed of in this way.   A few more were dumped in
the late 1950s but scrap metal prices had lifted in response
to post war material shortages and many a locomotive was
shipped
  photo  
  caption  
to Japan.   Later there was a change of destination to
Pacific Scrap in Auckland, but not of policy.   Large
numbers disappeared in this manner.  
    Today a small handful of part time railway
archeologists have tracked down the scattered dump sites.
  Foremost is probably Timaru enthusiast Mark Denne,
recently appointed manager of the Pleasant Point Railway
Museum in South Canterbury.   Mark has spent a
considerable amount of time researching old files and locating
old dump sites.  
    Amongst places identified have been two sites on
Southland 's Oreti river, the Oamaru foreshore, various places
along the Waimakariri and Bealey rivers in the Arthurs Pass
region, Omoto on the Grey river and Seddonville north of
Westport.  
    Few places have been located in the North
    island    Island    .   The author stumbled
on one such dump site during an evening stroll along the New
Plymouth beach in 1983.   Whilst climbing around a small
cliff area just north of the old railway station, I found
myself hanging on to something that looked like a rock but
certainly didn't feel like one.   Closer examination in
failing light revealed the sand dome of a locomotive and,
shortly afterwards, I discovered I was standing on the
boiler.  
    A subsequent visit with Mark Denne resulted in a
number of locomotive parts being identified.   Some were
probably only scrapped boilers but at least one was fairly
positively identified as a "WD" class tank-locomotive.   We
later located a photograph of such a locomotive shortly after
being dumped there.  
    Others were known to have been dumped in the Westfield
area near Auckland and behind the Gisborne locomotive sheds.
  The boiler of an early Rogers K still lies on the shore
near Paekakariki.  
    Early in 1990 another dump site was located just south
of Pahiatua and already what is thought to be the major part
of another WD tank locomotive has been salvaged.   It is
thought that more parts and possibly complete locomotives
could be buried under tonnes of limestone rock in this area.
  There is evidence to suggest that the site may hold the
answer to one of the great railway mysteries in New Zealand -
the final resting place of the Baldwin locomotives of our most
successful private line, the Wellington Manawatu Railway
Company.  
    Some sites have already yielded up complete
locomotives.   In 1974 the Oreti river gave up K88, the
locomotive that had drawn the very first
Christchurch-Dunedin passenger train in 1878.   It was
successfully recovered by a local team in 1974 and its later
complete restoration by an Ashburton group led by the late
Bob Anderson is a major success story in locomotive
preservation.   K88 was restored to steam again for a number
of years and is currently laid up with a boiler problem and
awaiting eventual repair.   Two more Rogers Ks were
recovered - K92 now under rebuild in Southland and K94
currently thought to be in storage in Ashburton.  
    More recently a small team led by Wellington
enthusiast Hugh Stockbridge successfully salvaged two
locomotives from Coal Creek near Seddonville north of
Westport.   These are believed to be the sole survivors of
the WB tank locomotives built by the Baldwin works in the USA
in 1898.   When salvaged in 1989 they were therefore 91
years old and in quite reasonable condition considering it had
been close on thirty years since they had been dumped.   As
with K88, it is hoped they will one day grace the tracks
again.  
    About 1976 two small Bagnall industrial locomotives
were also dug out and retrieved&semi; one from a site near one of
the Waitakere Dams and the other from an old quarry near
Motuhora inland from Gisborne.   At least one of these is
believed to be under restoration.   Another 20 have been
retrieved from playgrounds, parks and from use as stationary
boilers.   Whilst these are in a different category, their
retrieval and, in some cases, restoration are just as
important.  
    What does the future hold?   How many more will be
retrieved or what further discoveries will be made?   Few
records were kept of the various engine dumpings and railway
archeologists must spend many hours trying to
  photo  
  caption  
piece together the clues that remain.   Even locomotives at
even known sites can prove elusive, some being covered up by
later works or even rivers.  
    Prime possibilities for recovery are three relatively
intact locomotives&semi; two at Omoto just a short walk from the
bridges across the Grey river just outside Greymouth, and
another near Hawera.  
    The two Omoto engines are UB330 (Baldwin 1901) and
UC365 (Sharp Stewart
  photo  
  caption  
and Co, Glasgow 1901).   They lie amongst a pile of other
engines, having been dumped there in 1958 and 1961
respectively.   Virtually the only survivors of these two
famous classes, the two are also perhaps the last examples of
the 4-6-0 wheel arrangement to exist in New Zealand.
  They lie on the inside of a curve and present a difficult
lift for a crane due to their distance from the railway track.
  An attempt from a barge mounted crane may prove a more
viable option.  
    The Hawera example is AB745 which ran into a washout
just south of the town one night back in 1956.   At the time
the main trunk line was closed due to slips and the decision
was made to abandon the locomotive and cover it with fill
in order to get the line back in operation as soon as
possible.   Today, from all accounts, it lies intact.
  Several groups have given some thought to its salvage
but to date nothing has been attempted.   Its proximity to
the main line may provide problems however it remains a
possibility for the future.   When one sees the difficulties
overcome in recovering the three Rogers K 's and the WBs,
the recovery of AB745 is a formidable but not impossible
task.  
    To date at least seven locomotives have been
recovered.   One has already graced the tracks again and
another, K92, is expected to do so during 1991.   Several
more are thought to be undergoing rebuilds.  
    Twenty years ago few would have thought it possible
and no doubt the next twenty years will see some more major
recoveries&semi; any one of the above Omoto or Hawera locomotives
will be an important event.  
    As for the mystery of the fate of the Wellington
Manawatu Railway (WMR) locomotives - even pinpointing the
location of one is the "the big one" which drives the railway
archeologists on like oil drillers hoping for a gusher.
  How could a dozen or so locomotives vanish without trace?
  Surely they might just have been dumped ....
somewhere!      
  

      ORARI   - the story of a South Canterbury
settlement  
    by Lionel A Percy  
    DURING 1857, on one of many trips south, Thomas Cass,
chief surveyor of the Canterbury District, came upon an
area known as Fitzgerald.   After crossing the Orari River
he decided he would call the area Orari, the Maori name for
butterfish.  
    While examining the area, Mr Cass decided the land
might have great potential for dairying and agriculture and,
as soon as he returned to the Land Office in Christchurch, he
wrote to the Commissioner of Waste Lands in Auckland.   At
the time Auckland was the capital of New Zealand until the
seat of government was shifted to Wellington in 1863.  
    Dated 11 June 1857, the letter was an application
recommending a reserve of 100 acres for the township of Orari,
providing it had an accommodation house and a ferry.   The
letter was quickly sent and it wasn't long before there was a
reply from the Commissioner, agreeing to the recommended
reserve, running parallel to the Orari River on the south
bank.  
    Some time after Mr Cass had been to Orari, a bushman
by the name of John Giles built the first accommodation house,
approximately 300 yards south of the river crossing on the
east side of what would later become the South Road.   Mr
Giles applied for a conditional licence in 1858 and it was
granted the same year.   The conditions included: stables
for at least three horses&semi; a good supply of oats&semi; a stockyard&semi;
and beds for weary travellers.  
    Mr Giles had sufficient stables for five horses, a
continuous supply of oats and sleeping accommodation for 14
people, and on the very few occasions of overcrowding Mrs
Giles had to forfeit her bed.  
    Issued a provisional licence in 1860, Mr Giles didn't
stay long and sold the house to William Stranks.   Things
picked up rather rapidly and it wasn't too long before Mr
Stranks was widely known for his superb fish dinners.
  Every coachman, weary hungry traveller and local
householder couldn't wait to sample the exquisite cuisine
served there.   In fact on the very porch of the house was a
sign reading:
  GOOD FISH DINNERS
DANCING
SATURDAY AND SUNDAY
NIGHTS     in a box    
    Those were the days.   No telephone was needed, as
word spread faster by bush telegraph.   After Mr Stranks
left there were many more owners, the last being Samuel 
  photo  
  caption  
  photo  
Breadley who stayed only a few years.  
    Sadly, in 1887 the accommodation house was destroyed
by fire and, although no lives were lost, nothing could be
saved.   The cause of the fire was a loose gas lamp falling
from its wall mounting, on to the landing in the stairway and
igniting the tinder-dry timber of the stairs.   The fire
quickly burned the second storey and then continued its
destructive way through the ground floor, leaving pieces of
charred timber in its wake.  
    Since 1853 the Macdonalds had owned the Orari Estate,
with an area of 20,334 acres spreading from the Orari River to
the Rangitata River and from the sea to the upper Orari
Bridge.   Through those early years runholders and farmers,
most of them of English descent, often held horse racing
events and hunts on their properties, with prizes often
consisting of bridles and saddles, for first and second
places.  
    Everyone enjoyed themselves and always had a great day
out.  
    W.K. Macdonald was one such person who always liked
riding horses and about March 1859 he decided why not have a
racecourse to race on? In the next couple of days some friends
of his, Hewlings, Jollie, Young and Colonel McPherson, headed
off to view a piece of ground near where the present Orari
Racecourse now stands.   They set to and cleared most of the
tussocks and matagouri bushes and harrowed a circular one-mile
track.  
    By the end of March the course was ready and was
marked off with flags at each furlong.   The big day came, 1
April 1858, sun shining, track in fine racing condition.
  Representing Orari was E.H. Martelli who would be riding
W.K. Macdonald 's arabian bred horse Niger, and representing
Waimate was G. Brayshaw on Michael Studholme 's horse Sir
Charles.  
    Entrance fee was two pounds, a 50 pound wager was set
and the race would go into the history books in years to come
as the very first recorded race in South Canterbury.   The
race started, and off went Niger straight into the lead,
keeping Sir Charles four to five lengths behind.   It was to
be a long race, three times round the one-mile circuit, and
coming down the home stretch Niger, with its good stamina, was
still holding on to first place and won easily at the finish
line.  
    Orari contained only four houses in 1859: Macdonald 's,
Austin 's, the accommodation house and Thomas Bushell Pierce 's.
  Mr Austin worked on the Orari Estate for some time as a
labourer, while Mr Pierce was the first orchardist in
Orari.  
    A weekly mail service from Orari to Geraldine, five
miles to the west, began on 1 January 1868 and three years
later the first post office was opened in a room that
eventually joined on to the first railway station.   The
railway was being laid from Ferrymead to Christchurch and from
Christchurch to Timaru and would later go to Dunedin.
  Contractors were needed as it was laid in sections between
towns.   Enroute tenders would be called for and W. Fuller
of Christchurch got the contract for 12,502 pounds for the
section between Ealing and Temuka.   The track was soon laid
and on 4 February 1876 the section through Orari was
officially opened.  
    During 1872 5,949 letters and 1,447 books and
newspapers were despatched from Orari.   The first census
was taken in 1878, when the population was 133 persons.   No
township was laid out until April 1879 and ground in Orari was
offered for sale later on in the year for 30 pounds an acre,
but very few sections were sold.   The township was
resurveyed in larger sections in October 1886 (as can be seen
on the map) and was let as village homestead sections.  
    With the railway up and running there was a great need
for maintenance crews to work on the line, so carpenters were
soon busy erecting railway style houses for the employees.
  As more railways workers came to the district there was
great need for a school for their children, so in 1879 the
first school was opened in Slack Street north, with the first
recorded meeting of the school committee being held on 18
September 1880.   It came to be known as the South Orari
School, consisting of just one room.  
    The first teacher was J.S. Sumner, who remained for
two years and was followed by F.J. Fraser.   In 1881 the
roll stood at 47 pupils, but the average attendance was rather
low and the committee had great difficulty in keeping the
school a free Education Board school.   Apparently schools
with an average below 25 pupils were known as aided schools
and the residents of such a district had to pay part of the
educational costs to teach the children.  
  photo  
  captions  
  photo  
    By 1883 the roll had increased to 65, so an additional
classroom was added to the existing one.   Soon after 1900
the school had grown sufficiently to need a third teacher, so
the second room was divided in half by a curtain.  
    In 1923, during the late afternoon of 23 August when
school had finished for the day, fire drifted slowly through
the school building.   Most records were able to be saved,
but soon afterwards the fire quickly demolished the school to
ground level, probably caused by an overheated chimney.
  Until a new school was built in 1924, a large tent and a
shelter shed were used for classrooms.  
    Les Pierce was the first school bus driver in 1927,
also delivering mail and stores in the Belfield-Orari area.
  William Mason was the first storekeeper in the township
and his store, consisting of an ironmongery, bakery, butchery
and drapery, ideally stocked with grocery lines as well, was
opened in 1881.   The store was situated on the west side of
the Main South Highway near the corner of Orari Street, now
known as Orari Station Road and also a route to Geraldine.
  Mr Mason also had 120 acres of good agricultural
ground where he grew wheat, reaping 97 bushells to the acre in
one season.   Fire completely destroyed Mason 's Store in
1929.  
    In 1927 another store was built near the corner of
Slack Street on Orari Station Road.   Known as Henderson 's
Grocery Store, it was later mortgaged to Morrison 's in
Geraldine as Henderson went bankrupt, and after the store was
cleared of all items Henderson 's son made it into a billiard
hall.  
    Around 1928 another store was built, this time on the
eastern side of the Main South Highway, more or less opposite
the corner of Orari Station Road.   People by the name of
Burkes were the first owners, followed by the Killohs and then
the Becks.   While the Killohs were in business the
opportunity arose to take over Henderson 's Billiard Hall,
which from then on was known as Killoh 's Billiard Hall.
  During the Second World War the billiard hall was used as
a Red Cross centre and in 1947 it was sold for 150 pounds to
Geraldine Transport for offices.   Now Mount Cook
Freightlines owns the offices which can still be seen opposite
  photo  
  captions  
  photo  
North End Ford in Geraldine.  
    Mr and Mrs L. Sanders took over Beck 's Store in 1954,
staying for 30 years in Orari as storekeepers.   On 9
September 1978 the Orari Store was destroyed by fire, causing
more than $60,000 worth of damage.   Nothing was left except
charred remains of a few of the studs and floor joists.
  Two fire appliances, three tankers and two pumps, along
with 26 firefighters, battled to bring the blaze under
control.  
    A house nearby, where the Sanders had lived while
running the store, was soon converted into a shop and the
Sanders moved into an adjacent house.   The new shop was
soon up and running, but Mr Sanders was forced to give up
through ill health and people by the name of McBeth leased the
shop for about six months.   After the McBeths left Mr and
Mrs Des Garnham took over the lease and have been there ever
since.  
    During 1881 a reserve of 87 acres 3 roods was set
apart to become the Geraldine Racecourse Reserve, being
gazetted in the same year.   It is understood that at some
stage a grandstand of round construction was built opposite
the six furlong post and at one time the horses may have raced
clock  -  wise.   The straight was obviously between the
five and six furlong posts.   A stand containing 11 tiers of
seats to accommodate 250 people was erected in 1882 along with
a   judges'   box and   stewards'   room, but in 1884
fire completely destroyed the stand at the six and most of the
course records.  
    It is not known in what year the caretaker 's house
was built on the Racecourse Reserve, but the first caretaker
to take up residence was Samuel Breadley in 1895.   Two rows
of stables were erected behind the caretaker 's house some time
during that period and were destroyed by fire on 22 November
1957.   The back wall of the 1882 grandstand was gutted by
fire on 21 March 1983, through the boiler being left
unattended while it was still hot.   The back wall was
soon mended and the grandstand still stands today on the site
it was first built on.  
    Many horse trainers have trained horses in Orari over
the years and my uncle L.H. Pratt is just one of them.   He
taught Bill and his brother Bob Skelton to ride and in the
1952-53 season my uncle was the leading horse trainer of
Canterbury, Bill Skelton was leading jockey and brother Bob
was leading apprentice.   L.H.     Pratt has trained
more than 700 horses to date and still has three in work.  
    In 1903 a new two-storeyed hotel opened its doors to
the public.   Sited opposite the railway station on the
eastern side of the Main South Highway, it was known as
Quirke 's Hotel as they owned it, and also called The
Fisherman 's Rest.   There were 45 stables behind the hotel
and horse sales were held in the adjoining yard.   School
teachers and horse trainers often boarded at the hotel.
  Around 1905, with changes to the electoral boundaries, the
district went dry and Quirke 's Hotel became a boarding house.
  It was pulled down in July 1965.  
      A yarn that comes to mind concerns a young fellow
who was courting a young lady residing at Quirke 's.   On
this particular day he went to town and bought himself a flash
new suit as he was going to see his lady friend that night.
  Night time came and off he went on his motorcycle to
arrive at the boarding house, not realising he had been
followed by the local hard cases of Orari.  
    He never used the front entrance, but always climbed
up one of the verandah posts and in through her bedroom
window.   While he was visiting this night, the local lads
set to with paintbrushes and buckets of a sticky substance and
painted the post he had climbed.   When the courting was
finally over the particular fellow in question climbed out the
window, slid down the post which he thought was covered in
frost because of its stickiness and, jumping on his
motorcycle, headed for home.  
    What a shock he got when he arrived home, for there
down the middle of his new suit was a stripe of none other
than Stockholm Tar.   Many a laugh was had over that
little story, and there are a lot more that happened in those
good old days.  
    Another that comes to mind is that of an old bloke who
lived by the railway line.   Every so often the slow train
would come along and the men on it would throw off some coal
for him.   One day they were most generous and threw off
enough coal to fill three sacks, so over to the line the old
bloke went and filled his three sacks with coal.  
    What he didn't know was that another gentleman from
Orari had seen him.   Of course the old fella who filled the
sacks always left them near the line and came to collect them
once it was dark.   On this particular day he was due for a
shock as the other gentleman took the sacks home and filled
his own coal bins, refilling the sacks with stones and
returning them to their hiding place near the railway line.
  It wasn't until a few days later when the old fella went
to get some coal for his fire that he realised he had been
tricked.      
  

        Bolton Street Memorial Park    
    Hugh Fullarton  
      After a quarter of a century, the opening of an
extension to the Bolton Street Memorial Park offered
Wellington some recompense for the destruction of part of its
most historic cemetery.    
  captions    photos    
    About eighteen months after the first New Zealand
Company settlers had arrived on Petone Beach, the need for a
cemetery to serve the new settlement of Wellington was
recognised.   In August 1841, eighteen acres of land
adjacent to the lower end of Bolton Street and extending
westwards to Tinakori Road were formally designated for that
purpose.   In later years, the area of the cemetery was
significantly reduced - for reasons fully explained in
Margaret Alington 's history of the cemetery,   Unquiet
Earth  , published in 1978.   Certainly no more
appropriate title for this book could have been chosen as it
describes the cemetery 's first stormy years, the related
constitution of three separate cemeteries, the pressures for a
new cemetery, and the controversial extension of adjacent
Bowen Street for the construction of a tram and roadway link
with Tinakori Road.   However, a still greater conflict was
to arise when the Wellington Urban Motorway severed the
cemetery reserve - a major issue also recorded in   Unquiet
Earth  .  
    This article sets out some of the developments which
followed on from the decision to construct a motorway to the
opening of an extension to the Bolton Street Memorial Park on
27 March 1990 - twenty-five years after it had been promised
to the citizens of Wellington.  
    Motorway Action  
    In the late 1950s, the necessity for a marked
improvement in the standard of highway serving the Capital
City was abundantly clear.   Initial steps to meet that need
were taken by the Ministry of Works in 1959 when several
tentative routes were the subject of a close study and
consultation with the City Engineer.  
    In September 1960, following an investigation of
roading developments in overseas countries, the City Engineer
strongly advised his Council to retain a firm of
transportation consultants to prepare a master transportation
plan for the city.   The recommendation was accepted.   In
October 1961, De Leuw Cather representatives commenced action
on this major work.   Their project manager was urged by the
District Commissioner of Works to find, if possible, a
better route than the one currently under consideration
because it adversely affected the Bolton Street Cemetery.
  However, in August 1961, the consultants recommended
the adoption of a route that still traversed those historic
acres.  
    In May 1965, after much discussion and soul-searching,
the City Council and the National Roads Board, with the
support of the Government, authorised the adoption of the
motorway route recommended by the consultants.   The
Ministry of Works, as the design and construction agency
of the Roads Board, was then faced with many human engineering
problems, as well as problems calling for expertise in civil
and structural   photo    caption  
engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land
purchase and administration.  
    Motorway Design Criteria  
    In the development of design proposals for the
Wellington Motorway, Ministry of Works officers were concerned
to do more than construct a facility having adequate traffic
capacity and high standards of safety.   They were
determined also to have close regard to environmental and
humane issues.   Their aim was to locate the motorway with
great care, to construct graceful associated structures, and
to have adjacent areas landscaped and planted in such a manner
that, when completed, the entire work would be not only
functionally efficient but also pleasing to the eye.   The
New Zealand Institution of Engineers, by granting its
first environmental award to the motorway project in 1972,
recognised the attainment of that high purpose.   Their view
was endorsed by the award of an   Engineering 1990  
plaque which noted in particular the efforts made to develop
the motorway in an   "environmentally
sensitive"   manner.  
    Planned Park Extension  
    Following a decision on the motorway route, the City
Council took steps to make cemetery land available for the
proposed work - free of cost.   For its part, the National
Roads Board in May 1965 approved a Ministry of Works
recommendation that an   "Early   Settlers'  
Memorial Park"   extending the full length of Mowbray
Street from Bolton to Bowen Street, together with a piazza
over the motorway, should be provided to compensate - at
least in part - for the loss of public open space.   The
Board accepted financial liability for the cost of these
works, and the City Council enthusiastically supported their
execution.   Many citizens, in particular members of the
Bolton Street Cemetery Preservation Society as well as the
Board of the New Zealand Historic Places Trust, remained
strongly opposed to the motorway scheme&semi; others pressed just
as strongly for its early completion.  
    Progress and Problems  
    Over succeeding years, motorway construction proceeded
steadily southward through the Bolton Street Cemetery and so
to Ghuznee and Vivian Streets where, for financial reasons, it
was halted by the Roads Board.   The concurrent construction
of the motorway and the associated memorial park had been
proposed.   Sadly, acquisition of the land necessary for
that procedure - although pressed vigorously over several
years - could not be achieved.   It was mainly this factor
that led to the formation of the Friends of Bolton Street
Cemetery Inc. in 1977  .    
    The proposed addition to the cemetery reserve needed
for the memorial park called for the acquisition of land owned
by the City Council, the Dairy and Meat Marketing Boards, the
Reserve Bank and the University Grants Committee.
  Council land was readily available.   Acquisition of the
further essential areas was proposed on the following basis:
&bullet;   Dairy and Meat Board land would be
exchanged for land within the then proposed off-ramp loop
at Bowen Street.
&bullet;   Reserve Bank land would be exchanged for
the Mowbray Street road reserve following the closing of
the street.
&bullet;   University Grants Committee land (required
in part also for the widening of Bowen Street and a proposed
motorway on-ramp) would be made available by the relocation of
the Committee 's office.  
    Significant Developments  
    Progress on the motorway and the associated memorial
park project was seriously affected by several significant
developments:
&bullet;   The City Council, when reviewing its
district planning scheme, was unable to zone the proposed park
as 'Reserve' or 'Open Space' because amendments to the
Public Works and Town and Country Planning Acts restricted
such zoning to land owned by the Council.   The land
required for the park was then zoned 'Office B' - which led to
a marked increase in its value.   Objections to this zoning
were lodged by the Friends Society, but to no avail.
&bullet;   The National Roads Board found that
inflation and the demands of motorway programmes were severely
straining its resources.   Accordingly, it 
  photos    captions  
decided to construct only one carriageway beyond Bolton Street
and to defer - and later abandon - the proposed construction
of on- and off-ramps at Bowen Street.   That decision
negated the proposed land exchange for Dairy and Meat Board
land.   It also adversely affected negotiations to acquire
the University Grants Committee land.
&bullet;   The Dairy and Meat Boards emphasised the
need for adequate carparking facilities to be available in any
settlement.   Efforts made over several years to find an
alternative site for their offices were unsuccessful.
&bullet;   The Reserve Bank likewise required any
settlement to make adequate provision for carparking.
  The proposed exchange of Bank land for Mowbray Street road
reserve was frustrated by a Supreme Court decision.
&bullet;   Representatives of the University Grants
Committee in May 1965 had recognised the need for their
land to be acquired for motorway works, and they had commented
favourably on the associated park development proposal.
  However, following the modification of motorway plans,
all efforts to acquire their land failed.
&bullet;   The City Council advised the Roads Board to
build a footbridge over the motorway rather than the planned
piazza.  
    Reappraisal of Situation  
    The developments outlined above led to a
reappraisal of the situation by all authorities
concerned.   In May 1980 the National Roads Board
expressed its inability to agree to the purchase and
development of the Dairy and Meat   Boards'   land, but
offered $200,000 towards the memorial park project and $50,000
for the restoration of the chapel, an offer which was declined
by the Council.   Then in February 1981 the Roads Board 
  maps  
repeated its previous offer, coupled with a long  -  term
lease of the on-ramp land taken from the cemetery in 1967 - an
offer which was also declined.  
    At about this time the Minister of Works and
Development and Chairman of the National Roads Board advised
the Friends of the Bolton Street Cemetery that the
  "imaginative proposals which had been so widely
acclaimed"   could not be implemented as   "the
painstaking efforts made over many years to reconcile the
conflicting views of the Council and Dairy Board"   had
failed.   He added that many like himself remembered the
cemetery as it was in earlier days -   "unloved and
uncared for"   - and that   "the Roads Board
derived no satisfaction in not honouring undertakings, but
believed that it had gone as far as it could in prevailing
circumstances"  .  
    Finally, in July 1981 the Roads Board offered $500,000
in full and final settlement of all outstanding matters,
plus $50,000 for chapel restoration.   The City Council
accepted that offer and in so doing became fully responsible
for the development of the memorial park.  
    Memorial Park cum Carpark  
    Ministry of Works engineers and architects tried
earnestly, but without success, to find a solution to the land
acquisition problem by designing a carpark structure with a
memorial park extension overhead.   As time went on it
became clear from City Council and University Grants
Committee statements that plans for the proposed park
extension could no longer include Grants Committee land, even
though, with the support 
  caption    photo  
of the Roads Board and City Council, that was the stated
intention in 1965.  
    In March 1983, with a view to facilitating action, the
then Chairman of the Friends Society, the late Helmut
Einhorn, prepared a firm proposal for a carpark on Dairy
Board, Reserve Bank and Council land with the memorial park
above.   The Friends presented this proposal to the
authorities concerned.   An opportunity for consultation was
sought - but not granted.  
    The Final Solution  
    In April 1986 the City Council allowed the Friends to
see a proposal which Fletcher Development and Construction
had developed in consultation with the Council and Mowbray
Street land owners, and for which planning approval had been
sought.   This, it was hoped, would be a scheme which would
lead to the completion of the long delayed memorial project.
  In useful discussion with representatives of the Council
and Fletchers, the Friends were able to secure certain
desirable modifications to this scheme.  
    When the amended design came before the Council 's
Planning Committee in September 1986, it comprised a twelve
storey building occupying all of the Grants Committee land
and about half of the Reserve Bank land.   Over the balance
of the Reserve Bank land, the small area of Council land and
the Dairy and Meat   Boards'   land, a six level carpark
building in deep excavation was proposed.   Above that
structure an attractively landscaped park area, including
a chapel and linked to the existing memorial park, had been
designed.  
    John Daniels, then Chairman of the Friends and
Director of the Historic Places Trust, appeared before the
Council 's Planning Committee in support of the Fletcher
proposal, but drew attention to the following points:
&bullet;   The Friends had come to terms with the fact
that the land that was the subject of the application was
still in private ownership, and that an office building could
be erected there as of right.
&bullet;   The Friends could imagine far better
developments than the one proposed.   However, economic
and political reality dictated that they were not now
attainable.
&bullet;   Initial proposals had not been acceptable
to the Friends as they did not achieve the desired degree of
integration between the existing park and the proposed new
park over the top of the carpark building.   The compromise
put forward by Fletchers was, however, acceptable to the
Friends.  
    The End of the Saga  
    Fletcher 's   Fletchers is a colloquial abbreviation
for Fletcher Challenge.  This apostrophe is correct  
proposal was approved by the Council on the grounds that the
firm 's imaginative design warranted the dispensations sought.
  The Memorial Park project was finally completed early in
1990, and in March an opening ceremony was held.
  Addresses were given by the Mayor of Wellington, James
Belich, and historian Margaret Alington.   The mass
grave was consecrated, the reconstructed chapel dedicated, and
a bronze memorial 'book' was unveiled.   The extension to
the Bolton Street Memorial Park was then declared open.  
    The project had taken twenty-five years to bring to
fruition.   The sustained and conscientious efforts of
the Friends of Bolton Street Cemetery and Ministry of Works
officers had, at last, - in part - been successful.   An
asset for the city for all time had been created.    
  

            Flush Times, Bust Times        
        Money in the hand      
    Working people throughout the history of New Zealand
were repeatedly promised that their wages would get better
and better, that they could look forward to a future of ever
increasing prosperity.   The promise was almost always
fulfilled.   Every generation got richer, from the time the
colonists first stepped ashore up to the time working people
sat in front of their televisions watching the first steps
taken on the Moon.  
    Incomes in the late 1930s recovered quickly from the
slump.   New Zealand workers, grumbled one National
politician in 1936, were   'the highest paid workers in
the world'  .   Incomes kept growing, zooming up
seventy per cent during the war, then even faster after the
war.   Working people spent money as never before.
  Employers and the middle class protested that workers had
become underworked and overpaid.   Communists complained that
they had come to believe the   'illusions'  of
  'prosperity for ever'  .   Workers felt excited
and dizzy.     'We came here without a bean'  ,
enthused a hydro worker at Roxburgh in 1955&semi;   'now we
have this three-piece suite, the bedroom one, an expensive
radiogram, and I have bought the wife a fridge and a washing
machine ...   We 're hoping to get a car in November.'  
  A generation of binge had begun.   Working people in the
1960s bought televisions and stereos.   They bought pool
tables for their rumpus rooms.   They flew away for winter
holidays on the Gold Coast.   They staggered out of
supermarkets, trolleys tottering with food.  
    Wages not only grew bigger, but more secure.   Unions
won a wide range of allowances and extra payments to protect
workers from many of the old anxieties that had troubled their
parents and made their grandparents often worry where their
next bob might come from.   Payment was demanded from
employers for such things as   'bike money'  ,
  'tea money'  ,   'tool money'  .
  Workers negotiated   'penalty payments'  ,
extra pay for those forced to start their jobs early, finish
late, work overtime.   Some won   'confined space
money'  ,    'danger money'  ,    'dirty
work money'   or other special payments for hazardous,
unpleasant or demanding work.  
    Sickness, unemployment and old age were eased as the
welfare state paid new benefits much more generously than the
pennywise pensions of the old Liberal state.   Working people
no longer had to prove they were    'moral'   and
   'deserving'   before they were entitled to their
dole.   Accident Compensation, introduced in 1972, was one of
the most striking of the new welfare systems, providing injured
workers with a weekly benefit almost as good as a wage.
  Losing a limb was no longer a disaster which could destroy
a working class household.    
    Affluence seemed to have become an economic law.
  Working class schoolchildren in Timaru, invited by their
teachers in 1968 to write essays about the way things would be
by the end of the century, anticipated a world where people
would zoom along motorways astride motorbikes floating on air.
  People would all live in tall apartment blocks, thought
Pamela Newton.   The   'primitive way of life'  
of the 1960s, thought Roger Rae, would be transformed into a
new world inside   'huge skyscrapers'  .   Adults
found it as easy as children to think of the near future as a
time when a sun-bronzed people would frolic on hoverbikes,
recline inside giant buildings of glass.  
    The hoverbike of progress, however, stopped.   Timaru
and most other towns began to shrink.   Working people began
to grow poorer.   Single men on an average wage by the end of
the 1970s took home a pay packet, after tax and the loss of
overtime, worth not much more than nine dollars for every ten
they had brought home at the peak of the boom.   Women
workers were not hit quite so hard, a single woman on an
average wage managing to end the decade paid roughly what she
got at its start.   Her wage was urgently needed.   Slump
during the 1970s dismayed large numbers of working people&semi;
slump during the following decade was worse.   By 1990 the
real income of most wage and salary earners was worth
substantially less than at the start of the decade.
  Unemployment benefits fell too, worth only ninety-four
dollars for every hundred dollars paid seven years earlier.
  Old people found the real value of their pensions falling
unevenly until by the end of the decade the average
superannuation cheque was worth eighty-nine dollars for every
hundred dollars paid when the system first began.  
    Working people were in the middle of a generation
poorer than the generation before it.   Children who wrote
essays about skyscrapers in the 1960s had ended up unemployed
or in Australia.   Wages in the past had fallen for short
periods.   Workers had grown poorer during some years of the
1880s&semi; many had lost income during the early 1930s.   Never
had incomes fallen so steadily for so long.   Young people
leaving school in 1990 and looking for a job knew nothing but a
world where money got tighter and tighter.  
        Fair shares      
    Falling behind in a race to be rich was not necessarily
a bad thing.   People in the late 1960s and early 1970s often
looked forward to   'zero economic growth'   as a
cure for social ills, an escape from the malaise of suburbia,
the jerky oscillations of capitalism.  
    The race for high standards of living had certainly
never rewarded any of the winners with the prize of happiness.
  Wealth might shrink, but there was no reason why anybody
need suffer bad housing, bad food or bad health.   A smaller
national purse could be divvied out more fairly.   All
workers, argued the Federation of Labour in the early 1980s,
should have their working time cut back to a week of
thirty-five hours or less, without loss of pay.   Shortened
hours would open up new jobs for the unemployed, and would free
all workers to enjoy    'more educational, recreational
and leisure time'  .    captions    photos  
    Hours of work had always been a major concern of
working people.   High wages had often been thought too
costly if won at the expense of long hours, and unions had
always pressed employers for shorter days, longer breaks and
better holidays.   One of the most popular acts of the first
Labour government had been to cut the working week shorter, and
hours continued to shrink as the   'affluent
society'   thrived.   By 1970 public servants and many
clerks were working fewer than thirty-eight hours a week.
  Employers, desperate for workers to stay longer at their
machines or desks, offered higher and higher rates of overtime
pay to keep them there.   Holidays grew longer too.
  Labour turned the Saturday half-holiday into a full
holiday&semi; the weekend emerged in all its glory.
    'Statutory'   holidays increased to nine a
year, and most workers by the 1980s were officially entitled to
at least three full weeks away from work.  
    Shortening hours and longer holidays were knocked hard
by economic recession.   Working people suddenly became
desperate to get overtime or to    'moonlight'  .
  More and more workers were willing to stay on the job as
long as the employer demanded.   More and more employers made
use of contractors, casual workers, outworkers, asking from
them all kinds of broken hours, long hours, unspecified and
   'stretched'   hours.  
    Part-time work was a   'growth industry'  
based mainly on over  -  working women.   Fewer than one
out of ten paid workers during the flush years had been
part-time, but by 1990 they numbered more than one out of five.
  Most were women adding tiresome wage work to tedious
housework.   Often they found themselves kept at their
tasks  caption    photo  
longer than they were officially paid for.   Housewives were
used to long hours, to living in a world of unregulated and
endless work.   Like labourers in the nineteenth century,
they frequently dreaded the   'holidays'   of
others.   Holidays for a housewife meant more, not less,
work.   Appliances and gadgets were rammed in increasing
numbers into the houses of working people, but housework
remained a job where nothing was ever finished, where workers
were never given permission to knock off.     'You
never stop and you never come to the end'  , said one
housewife&semi;   'You 're always trying to catch up with
something'  .   Working class women, unable to control
the hours and conditions of work in their own kitchens, lacked
the time, the resources and often the energy to resist
exploitation when they took on wage or contract work as
well.  
    Overwork often ended with the worker falling sick,
though in the opinion of most middle class professionals the
main cause of ill health among working people was
  'bad'   personal habits, such as eating, drinking
and smoking too much.   Health problems in the late
twentieth century were increasingly defined by doctors as
   'diseases of affluence'  .   The people most
likely to sicken or die, however, were the   least  
affluent.   Only twelve out of every hundred rich men in one
city were in a state of   'other than good'  
health, but twenty-nine poor men, and thirty-five out of every
hundred poor women were ailing.  
    Women working in shops, offices and factories often
risked muscle injuries, problems with their joints, headaches,
disturbed vision and sometimes deafness or blindness from their
work.   Housewives suffered burns, chemical injuries,
electrocutions and other   'industrial accidents'  
in their kitchens, not to mention the ancestral   'bad
back'   of all housewives in all ages.   Housework was
not just dangerous, it was lonely and cheerless.   More than
four out of ten housewives with children in the working class
suburb of Hei Hei in 1986 were taking medication for stress or
depression.   Working men were even more likely than women to
suffer injuries or death in their work.   Death rates for
tradesmen, factory hands, labourers and miners during the 1980s
were much worse than for professional men or managers.   Ten
out of every thousand labouring men died each year, but only
four out of every thousand men working in professions or
management.  
    Death and disease visited the lives of working people
partly because of the high cost of health care.   Public
hospitals, enlarged by Labour during the 1930s, were forced
under Labour in the 1980s to shut down or cut back their
services.   Working people often found, as Mabel Howard had
discovered two generations earlier, that it was   'easier
to enter heaven than a public hospital'  .   Lack of
money caused tens of thousands of households to put off visits
to the doctor.   Mothers in working class districts began to
  'hoard medicines and administer them
themselves'  , according to one social worker.   They
   'dose their ailing youngsters with auntie 's
antibiotics'  , added a journalist.  
    Health problems were caused not so much by lack of
access to doctors, however, as by the difficulty many working
people found in looking after their own health.   Three out
of ten Christchurch families on low incomes were unable to
spend enough on food to provide   'a basic no-luxury
diet'  .   One in ten Hamilton families with four or
more 
  photo    caption  
children suffered from a shortage of food&semi; one in four did not
have fresh fruit available in the house.     'It 's
shocking to have to hide food from growing kids and say no to
them'  , protested one working class mother&semi;
  'I 've got apples hidden behind my dressing table and I
dish them out one at a time - now I have to do it with the
blasted eggs.'     Keeping warm and dry in winter was
often difficult.     'I turn the heaters off once the
children have gone to school'  , observed one
Christchurch woman.     'We have the heater going for
half an hour at night only'  , added another.
    'Last year I wore coats around the house'  ,
said a third&semi;   'I was scared of the power
bill.'      photo  
  caption  
    Working people, continuing to find their health broken
down by work, continued to be forced to bear many of the costs
which sickness or injury brought them.   Workers often lived
so close to the edge of their wage that they did not feel free
to convalesce on a government benefit.     'If I hurt
my back now, something like that'  , said a shearer,
  'that 's me buggered.'     Manual workers still
depended fundamentally on their strength and health to earn an
income.     'Well, you can't afford to be on a sickness
benefit'  , said John Dale, a labourer&semi;   'I 've
even asked to go back to work when I 've been
injured.'    
    Laws setting new controls over the health and safety of
workplaces proliferated during the mid twentieth century.
  Factories, shops, offices and warehouses were more firmly
regulated than ever before.   Timber workers, farm workers,
construction workers and many others were increasingly well
safeguarded too, while a wide variety of health laws imposed
other constraints on the power of employers to expose workers
to danger.   The net of laws, however, let many workers drop
through.   Laws could be evaded.   People often found
themselves working in places where laws did not apply.  
    Health and safety regulations touched particularly
lightly on the office buildings where so many workers now spent
their paid working lives.   Office buildings often
contaminated workers with dangerous pollutants from asbestos,
cable casings, adhesives, photocopiers and    'microscopic
organisms in carpets'  .   Computers brought a whole
new range of diseases to afflict the eyes, hands, backs and
heads of workers.   People suffering from   'computer
sicknesses'   at the Northern Trade Union health
centre by 1989 outnumbered those turning up in pain from
construction and factory work.     'Hi-tech'  ,
concluded a health officer, had   'brought in a whole lot
more worries instead of eliminating them.'    
    Safety laws, though often strict on paper, were not
always enforced in reality.     'You get dirt in your
skin, dirt in the air, the stuff you breathe'  ,
complained Peter King, moulder at an iron foundry&semi;   'I
started coughing up a lot of black stuff.'     Freezing
works continued to be dangerous places.     'One guy
got done in the leg'  , observed a labourer in one works,
  'he just collapsed into a bloody screaming
heap.'     The Islington works, employing up to 900
men, inflicted in a typical year at least 111 cuts and
lacerations, 65 sprains and strains, 36 crushings and
bruisings, 25 skin and bone infections and 21 fractures, and
numerous burns, scaldings or   'foreign bodies'  
in the eyes or other tissue of its workers.   Unsafe
practices were partly the   'fault'   of workers.
  Protective masks, gloves, goggles and other devices were so
clumsy and awkward that many felt uncomfortable using them,
especially when employers made no attempt to slow down the pace
of work.   Dangerous work, as always, was good business for
employers, bad luck for workers.    photo  
  caption  
    Long hours, dangerous or sickening work, further
sickness and even death from poverty, were not new to the lives
of working people.   Workers in the previous generation had
imagined that such things would disappear in the brave new
world of the late twentieth century.   Such things had not
disappeared.     'Death comes to the rich and poor
alike'  , noted one sociologist,   'but comes to
the poor sooner.'      
  

          Wild splendour      
        Deep in the subantarctic, where the
Furious Fifties welcome no intruder, aspiring settlers and
shipwrecked sailors encountered despair and failure on the
Auckland Islands.   Today these same islands are regarded as
some of New Zealand 's most magnificent wild
places.      
      WRITTEN BY LINDSAY POPE    
      A  LTHOUGH THEY LIE
far to the south of New Zealand, remote and rugged, the
Auckland Islands have provided the bleak setting for many
epic human dramas.   Like the basaltic cliffs which buttress
the islands against the southern currents, accounts of
endurance and despair, courage and futility rise out of the
ocean to defy the cynical blast of the Furious Fifties.  
    It was during the period of expansion into the
Pacific by the whale fishery at the turn of the 19th century
that they were discovered.   Returning from Australia, one
of the vessels of the renowned London merchant house, Samuel
Enderby and Sons, the   Ocean  , captained by Abraham
Bristow, sighted land on August 18, 1806.   Bristow 's log
records that   "The island, or islands, as being the
first discovered, I shall call Lord Auckland 's (my friend
through my father)"   and that   "this
place, I should suppose, abounds with seals, and sorry I
am that the time, and the lumbered state of my ship, do not
allow me to examine."    
  illustration  
  caption  
    Bristow returned the following year and claimed them
for the British Crown.  
    Immediately the news of the discovery became
known, sealers descended on the islands like vultures on
fresh carrion.   Operating in shore gangs, they clubbed
their timid quarry, prepared the skins for sale and rendered
down the carcasses to extract the oil.   Being a lucrative
trade, and the sealers secretive, few accounts of their
  "tough and bloody business"   survive.  
    Such was the exploitation of the fur seal rookeries
that by 1830 Captain Benjamin Morrell, aboard the
  Antarctic,   exploring the Pacific for opportunities
for American trade, commented,   "Although the
Auckland Islands once abounded with numerous herds of fur
and hair seals [sea lions], the American and English seamen
engaged in this business have made such clean work of it as
scarcely to leave a breed."    
    It was to be Morrell 's otherwise glowing report,
together with those of a series of scientific expeditions to
the group during the early 1840s, that contributed to the most
forlorn episode of human endeavour on the islands: the
ill-fated Hardwicke Settlement.  
    Charles Enderby, concerned at the moribund state of
the English whaling industry in the middle of last
century, was looking for a way to revive it.   His plan, the
broad outline of which he published in a pamphlet, was to
colonise the Auckland Islands and set up a whaling station
there.  
    He could not have chosen a more unfortunate location.
  Not only was the   islands'   soil completely
unsuitable for cultivation, but the climate was
uncongenial to the point of misery, the surrounding seas
treacherous and the winds incessant, ferocious
and cold.  
    So why did Enderby choose such an unlikely spot?
  Fergus McLaren, an historian of the subantarctic region,
suggests that his choice   "was no 
  photo  
  caption  
doubt influenced by the fact that the group had been
discovered by an Enderby vessel"  .   However, it is
equally likely that he was swayed by favourable published
accounts of the islands which drastically overrated its
natural endowments.  
    Sir James Clark Ross, aware of Enderby 's proposals,
wrote,   "In the whole range of the vast Southern
Ocean, no spot could be found combining so completely the
essential requisites for a fixed whaling
station."     Morrell enthused similarly:
  "The quality of the soil in this island is
sufficiently indicated by the uniform luxuriance of all
its productions.   Were the forests cleared away, very
few spots would be found that could not be converted to
excellent pasturage or tillage land"  .   In
addition, he described the climate as   "mild,
temperate and salubrious"  .  
    D'Urville authoritatively described Port Ross as
one of the best harbours of refuge in the world, while one of
his officers, Dubouzet, recorded that   "If ever
the fine harbours of these islands should attract
colonists thither, Laurie 's harbour would be the most
suitable point for the town."    
    Thus supported by many advocates, which Enderby
substantially quoted in a second pamphlet focusing on the
island 's natural suitability for settlement, the British
Southern Whale Fishery Company became incorporated and
obtained the leases of the Auckland Islands.   The company 's
commissioner-in-residence was to be Charles Enderby himself,
who was also commissioned as Lieutenant-Governor of the
islands.  
    So it was that three vessels, the   Samuel
Enderby,   the   Fancy   and the   Brisk,  
departed from Plymouth in August, 1849, carrying with them all
the hopes and visions of a group of colonists, as well as the
future profitability of the English Southern Fishery.
  Their objective: to colonise and establish a prosperous
settlement, to act as a whaling base, refit and replenish
trading and whaling vessels and trade with the separate
colonies of Australia and New Zealand.  
    Young married couples and their children, regarded as
ideal settlers, were predominant amongst those on board.
  Bringing carpentry, engineering, masonry, mechanical,
agricultural, medical and clerical skills in addition to
those traditionally associated with whaling, these brave
colonists seemed well prepared to fulfil the company 's
objectives.  
    They were in for a shock.  
    First, on arrival in December 1849 they were greeted
by a group of Maori.   Enderby was greatly perturbed, as he
had assured the settlers that the island was   "free
from aborigines"  .   The Maori, and their Moriori
slaves, under the leadership of chief Matioro of the Ngati
Mutunga, having become restless at the lack of martial
conflict at home, conscious that their right to have slaves
was being threatened by the progress of Christianity and
fearing   illustration    caption   further
retaliation for their part in the   Jean Bart   massacre
at the Chatham Islands in 1839, established themselves at
Crozier Point at the entrance to Port Ross during 1842.  
    Second, they encountered an   "inhospitable
mixture of rock bluff, peat swamp and tangled scrub"  .
  In place of the pasture and woods of England was vegetable
mould, boggy ground and impenetrable forests.  
    Third, the formidable weather, as if annoyed at these
intruders, showed its worst traits:   "gales of wind and
perpetual rain"   in a southern summer must have seemed an
ominous introduction to their new home.  
    Despite the unpleasant welcome, the enterprise of
creating the settlement ashore was tackled with
enthusiasm.   The town site was surveyed, land was
cleared for both building sites and cultivation.   Being
partially pre-built, the buildings to house the married
couples, the single men 's quarters, the zinc-covered
store  -  house, a workshop, chapel and the large
governor 's residence soon became visible.  
    To the Maori population, who in the preceding six
years had endured deprivation, hardship and internal frictions
(a second settlement being established on Enderby Island), the
prospect of a whaling station must have suggested
opportunities to prosper.   A number of men quickly got
themselves onto the company payroll as boatmen, labourers and
gardeners.  
    At the outset Enderby appointed the two Maori chiefs,
Matioro and Ngatere, special constables, a role which they
fulfilled enthusiastically.   The two groups coexisted in
relative harmony, the only real problems relating to the
association of Maori women with seamen, and drunkenness -
the universal vice in most fledgling Australasian
settlements.  
    Special celebrations were held on New Year 's Day,
1850, when the settlement at Erebus Cove was formally
named Hardwicke, after the Earl of Hardwicke, Governor of the
Southern Whale Fishing Company.  
    With the whaling season pending - the whales came into
the eastern bays to calve during the months of April and May -
the settlers assembled a cutter, while at the same time
proceeding with building dwellings, establishing gardens and
exploring their new homeland.  
    Although early in March six vessels were at anchor
in the harbour, few foreign ships visited the
settlement   photo    illustration    caption  
for refit and replenishment during the first year of
settlement.   Furthermore, in spite of some sightings,
no whales were caught by the shore station, and the larger
vessels returned from longer voyages with very little oil.
  Perhaps seeing the writing on the wall, five married
couples and their families and three single men departed for
Sydney at the end of May.  
    Nevertheless, work in the colony continued
satisfactorily: a road was surveyed, and labourers began its
construction using gravel from the beach, and a four-gun
battery was installed.  
    The winter of 1850 was milder than the bitter weather
of summer had forecast, and Enderby visited New Zealand and
Australia to arrange for an adequate supply of goods.
  Livestock, including sheep, cattle and horses from Sydney,
maintained a good condition with little attention.   The
four acres of land cleared for cultivation was fenced with
stakes to afford protection against the westerly winds, with
further internal protection to give the vegetables every
care possible.   Even so, gardening was a largely futile
exercise: nothing could improve the fertility of the soil,
and the settlement 's vegetables were pitiable - potatoes
the size of marbles, turnips - like   "miserable
radishes"  .   Only their 
  photo    caption    photo  
Maori neighbours seemed to have any success with the soil, and
augmented the imported stores with locally grown
produce.    
  On Enderby 's return to Hardwicke in September, whales
began to appear in the waters around the islands, but the
shore whaling continued to be a complete failure.   Morale
plummeted and tempers rose.   Enderby 's dual role as
both company and government representative, coupled with
his idealistic fervour, fueled an undercurrent of
dissatisfaction amongst the colonists.   His imposition
of   "pettifogging restrictions"   on the
  whalers'   and   settlers'   wilder spirits lent
him to be dubbed as both   "law maker and law
breaker"  .   It took the more practical assistant
commissioner, William Mackworth, to mediate between
Enderby and the colonists.  
    To help keep the peace, a jail was built on Shoe
Island, in the harbour, and saw constant use.   After the
retrieval of the chief surgeon, Mr J.S. Rodd, from the
waters near the jetty in a state of violent intoxication, and
his subsequent confinement there, the jail was named Rodd 's
Castle.   Mackworth 's private diary testifies to the
necessity for the jail.   On sentencing seven men to be
confined there, he writes that   "the difficulty of
supporting discipline in this Port is
extreme."     The two most common convictions
were intoxication and refusal of duty.  
    Towards the end of 1850, Sir George Grey paid a
friendly visit to the colony and stayed a week.   Grey was
pessimistic about the settlement 's future, despite
Enderby 's energy and the   colonists'   general
well  -  being creating a favourable impression.  
    A public holiday was declared on December 4 to
commemorate the settlement 's first anniversary.   A
regatta was held - in driving rain - but the year must have
ended in bleak resignation.  
      T  HE NEW YEAR saw the
arrival of three more company whaling ships, bringing the
total to eight.   Despite correspondence from the London
directors of the company expressing anxiety about the
venture, Enderby remained optimistic.   He continued to
spend the company 's capital on improving the buildings and
increasing the livestock population.  
    Much of the grazing for farm animals was found on
Enderby Island.   Enjoying a sunnier climate than that of
the main Auckland Island, grass growth was more rapid there.
  In addition, the sheltered beach at Sandy Bay on the
island was used by the Enderby settlers for recreation and
picnics.   Such was the harshness of conditions confronting
the settlers that Mackworth organised a roster for families to
spend a   "week at a time there"   in order that
they benefit from the change of air.  
    In the middle of 1851, with no improvement in
whaling fortunes, the company 's directors decided to send two
special commissioners to investigate matters.   By this
time &pound;30,000 of   shareholders'   funds
had been spent on 
  photo  
  caption  
developing the settlement and procuring and outfitting
whaling vessels, for the paltry return of just
&pound;3000 in the first year.  
    So it was that on December 18, 1851, George Dundas
M.P. and Thomas Preston, the company 's secretory, arrived
at Port Ross aboard the   Chieftain  .  
    Differences between Enderby and the special
commissioners soon emerged.   Undoubtedly, Enderby had
misled the directors (in one despatch he claimed   "the
cabbages and potatoes to be of excellent quality, and the
Swedish turnips better than that of England"  ).
  When they found prospects for the community to be even
bleaker than they expected, they recommended the immediate
abandonment of the settlement.   Enderby, sensing his
own demise, began to pursue protracted litigation
involving the company and the Colonial Office, even
sailing for New Zealand to vindicate his own actions and have
those of Dundas and Preston condemned.  
    In his absence, Mackworth supervised the
dismantling of Hardwicke.  
    The assistant surgeon, R.E. Malone, of the   HMS
Fantome,   a vessel sent to prevent trouble breaking
out at the settlement 's disbandment, gives an account of its
appearance:  
        "The settlement consisted of a large house
for the governor, a zinc-covered store, a building for
unmarried servants of the company, and about 25 other
houses on a point of land at the entrance to Laurie
Harbour."      
    After writing scornfully of the gardens, Malone
comments:       "We got a few eggs occasionally from
the settlers at 2s a dozen&semi; and the company charged us 7d
a pound for beef, and 9d for fed pork&semi; the former was bad, and
the latter seldom to be had...      
        "While we were at the Aucklands in July 1852,
there were on the islands 123 crew of the "Fantome", 4
merchant seamen, prisoners on board her, 40 crew of merchant
vessels in port, 36 men, 22 women, 34 children, 20 Maori men,
17 Maori women, 10 Maori children.   In total
306."       (Malone does not distinguish between
Maori and Moriori).  
    Ironically, during this time the only whale to be
caught by the Hardwicke shore station was harpooned,
captured and 40 barrels of oil extracted.  
    On August 5, 1852,   "having seen the buildings
broken up, and shipped the men, women and children on board
the company 's vessels fairly at sea"   the
  Fantome   weighed anchor.   From the   Earl of
Hardwicke,   already at sea, Mackworth wrote in his
journal,     "The satisfaction I feel at this
moment is beyond description.   My miserable life at Port
Ross will never be forgotten."      
    The reasons for Hardwicke 's failure are many, but
unquestionably the scarcity of whales and the
unpreparedness of the English whalers for extended
voyages in subantarctic waters were key factors.   When
to these are added a dismal climate, Enderby 's obdurate
personality and an infertile soil, then it is understandable
that many settlers preferred to try their luck on the
Victorian goldfields rather than endure prolonged
deprivation on the Auckland Islands.  
    By the time the colonists who did not choose to settle
in Australia reached England, the company was in liquidation.
  Enderby never regained his former stature and died
unnoticed in 1876.  
    In his formal role on the islands he had recorded the
births of 16 infants, officiated at five marriages and
conducted four funeral services: two of these deaths were
of very young babies.   Today it is the graveyard which
bears sole witness to the existence of this futile attempt at
settling.   Thirty-two months of misplaced enthusiasm
amount to a memorial to death in these islands of despair.  
    The Polynesians who welcomed and farewelled their
European counterparts left in two stages.   Matioro,
together with his followers and slaves, left for Stewart
Island during 1854, while it was not until 1856 that relatives
on the Chathams of those still stranded chartered a vessel to
bring them back.   They took their dead with them,
leaving behind a few flax bushes as their only
legacy.  
      O  VER THE NEXT half
century, in contrast to the previous inhabitants, the
islands received a steady influx of involuntary exiles.  
    The first of these was the crew of the
  Grafton,   a schooner which had been chartered from
Sydney to look for tin deposits on Campbell Island, 290km
south-east of the Auckland Islands.   Not finding any tin,
the captain, Thomas Musgrave, proceeded to the Auckland
Islands to obtain what seal skins he could in order to offset
their expenses.   With him was a French adventurer, F.E.
Raynal, who had had responsibility for the prospecting,
and three others.  
    While anchored in the southern Carnley Harbour the
ship was caught 
  photos  
  caption  
in a violent hurricane, snapped one anchor chain, dragged the
other, and ran aground on the rocky coast.   All five hands
made the shore, taking with them provisions, personal
effects and the ship 's skiff.  
    The account of their 20-month sojourn is every bit
as exciting as   Robinson Crusoe  , and is told in two
fascinating books, one by Musgrave and the other by Raynal.
  Both were forced to write their journals in sea lion blood
after their ink ran out.  
    From the outset, the survivors showed breathtaking
ingenuity.   Presented with the problem of building a
fireplace and chimney for their proposed hut, Raynal
manufactured a crude mortar made from burnt shells and gravel.
  Liberally applying the mortar between stones collected
from the shore, he was able to build a chimney 15 feet high,
topped with a chimney pot fashioned from copper sheathing
stripped from the   Grafton   's hull.  
    The rest of the house, which measured 24 by 16
feet and had a pitched roof, was constructed from rata trunks,
canvas and tussock thatch.   It had a planked floor and
door, a table, benches, beds - even two glass windows
salvaged from the captain 's cabin.   Dubbed "Epigwaitt",
North American Indian for "near the great waters", the hut
served them well, and its remains are still visible today.  
    Throughout their exile the men lived on sea lion,
shag, certain plant roots, and mussels and fish when they
could get them.   Musgrave records their normal bill of
fare:     "Breakfast - Seal stewed down to soup, fried
roots, boiled seal or roast seal, with water.   Dinner -
Ditto ditto.   Supper - Ditto ditto.   This repeated 21
times per week...   The men have stood it bravely thus far,
but it grieves me unspeakably to hear them wishing for
things which they cannot get.   I heard one just now wishing
he had but a bucket of potato-peelings!"      
    Raynal 's inventiveness know no 
  photos  
  caption  
bounds.   After succeeding with mortar, he proceeded to
manufacture soap: by dripping water through the burnt ashes of
seaweed and pounded shells, he collected a strong alkali,
which, when boiled with sea lion oil, produced   "an
excellent soap, which was of inestimable value to us, both as
regarded health and cleanliness"  .  
    He then succeeded in making a beer distillery (but
abandoned the idea for fear of the damage alcohol might do to
their fragile community) and designing a process for tanning
sea lion skins.   This involved steeping the skins in a
solution of lime made from burnt mussel shells, so that all
oily residues were destroyed.   The skins were then washed,
stretched and cleaned before being plunged into a solution
containing the tannin derived from rata bark.  
    Having provided his companions with clothing, blankets
and footwear, Raynal produced amusements in the form of
solitaire, chess and cards, and he and Musgrave conducted
nightly school lessons, teaching the others to read and write.
  A pet parakeet, which they taught to talk, added to
their domesticity.  
    Despite their apparent comfort, as the weeks became
months, hope of rescue declined.   By year 's end the group
resolved to rebuild the   Grafton   's boat in order that
it voyage to the mainland.   With only an axe, an adze, a
hammer and a gimlet, and what he could salvage from the bones
of the   Grafton,   Raynal set about his masterwork: the
construction of a double-action sealskin forge bellows.
  Once he had completed this indispensable piece of
equipment, he began to manufacture tools and nails from
bolts and old iron.   Raynal describes the scene:  
        "The charcoal glowed and crackled&semi; and
the bellows, manoeuvred by Musgrave, gave forth a sonorous
roaring, which to our ears seemed the sweetest music in
the world...   Before the end of the month I had made three
pairs of pincers of different sizes, three punches, a mould
for nails, a pair of tongs, a cold chisel for cutting iron, a
large hammer for beating it, two smaller ones for forging
it, and a number of little articles of which I foresaw I
should stand in need."      
    Six months after building began, the   Rescue  
was ready.   Provisioned with seal meat and fresh water
stored in bladders, Musgrave, Raynal and one other lashed
themselves to the deck in sail-cloth cases and set sail on
their great voyage to salvation.  
    For five days they battled a south  -  west storm,
capsizing at least once, drinking a little water but unable to
eat as their roasted seal meat had   "turned
rank"  , until on July 24, 1865, they made landfall at
Port Adventure, Stewart Island.   There, while
recuperating, Musgrave became aware that he and his crew
were not the only castaways to have been living on the
island.  
    During the night of May 10, 1864, in a severe gale the
  Invercauld  , in ballast from Melbourne to Callao,
struck the north-west corner of the islands.   All but six
of the crew of 25 made it ashore, many being injured in the
process.  
    At daybreak, after a night huddled together to keep
warm, those who 
  caption  
  illustration  
were able went to the scene of the wreck to see what could be
salvaged.   A miserable few pounds of salted pork and some
sodden biscuits were divided equally amongst the crew, and
some timbers salvaged from which a shelter was erected.
  After four days, having depleted the adjacent
shellfish beds, they scaled the near perpendicular cliffs in
search of a more providential haven.   Several days and
deaths later, and with only water and roots for sustenance, 15
survivors reached the bay,   "where we found some
limpets on the rocks, of which we ate heartily.     We
also caught two seals and found them good
food.  "    
    Possessing neither the resources nor the leadership
that sustained the   Grafton   crew, the
  Invercauld   's men, thinking their chances of survival
would be better, divided into small groups.   Captain
Dalgarno wrote that     "After living three months
upon limpets, they got done, and all we had again were the
roots and water, seeing no more seals.   By the end of
August the only survivors were myself, the mate, and
Robert Holding, seaman... all very much
reduced."      
    In order to obtain a more consistent supply of
food, a primitive canoe of rata branches and sealskins was
constructed to transport them to Enderby Island.
      "Gradually we collected a sufficient
number of seal  -  skins to construct a little hut, like
the cabins of Eskimos&semi; but it protected us very imperfectly
against the continual rains and the severity of that
frightful climate."       They lived off rabbits
and seal flesh.   The three
survivors   photos    caption   were rescued
after twelve months and 10 days when they saw the Portuguese
ship   Julian   entering Port Ross, with the misguided
hope that her serious leaks could be repaired at
Hardwicke.  
    In New Zealand, Musgrave appealed to official
sources to rescue his two crew still at Carnley Harbour.
  He was turned down, but succeeded in winning the support
of the people of Invercargill.   Their sponsorship enabled
him to charter a local vessel, the   Flying Scud  , and
collect his men.   On their way home, they called in at Port
Ross, and there discovered the decomposing remains of a man in
an abandoned shack belonging to the Hardwicke settlement.
  By the body were some shells, a bottle of fresh water and
a slate covered in hieroglyphics, from which only the word
"James" could be deciphered.   Presumably, this was the
corpse of James Rigth, one of the   Invercauld   crew
who had earlier separated from 
  photos  
  captions  
Dalgarno.  
      It was at Musgrave 's urging that the state
governments of Victoria and New South Wales, as well as the
Southland Provincial Government, recognised that the problem
of shipwrecks in the subantarctic was an official
responsibility.   Late in 1865, both the   Victoria  
and   Southland   searched the island groups for
castaways.   These two vessels had scarcely returned
from the Auckland Islands before the most celebrated wreck to
occur there happened.  
      Travelling from Melbourne with 83 passengers and
crew, and carrying some 2500 ounces of gold for the Bank of
New South Wales, the   General Grant  , a 1200-tonne
three-masted barque, sighted land on the night of May 13,
1866.   The captain tried to steer between Disappointment
Island and the main island, but at the crucial moment the
wind fell, leaving the vessel to the mercy of the strong
currents that flow around that precipitous
coast.      

  

        gleeson 's ghosts    
    In their day, Auckland 's old pubs were among the
grandest buildings in town, their corner sites provoking
architects into flights of decorative fancy which still make
passers-by look twice.   Many were demolished in the last
two decades when our drinking habits changed and although some
of the survivors are thriving, for others the writing is on
the wall.     PETER SHAW   cruises the
bars.  
    THE VICTORIAN CORNER pubs on the long western
ridge above Queen Street are some of the city 's oldest and
most distinctive buildings.   Driving up Hobson Street you
flash past the Albion, the Prince Arthur and the City.   In
Nelson Street the Empire stands resplendent.   In Albert
Street the Shakespeare beckons in lurid pink.   Tucked on
the corner of Victoria Street West and Federal Street is the
Aurora.   These are the survivors.  
    These old hotels have weathered enormous changes in
  Aucklanders'   social habits.   They were built at a
time when the law obliged those selling liquor to provide
accommodation: you couldn't get a liquor licence unless
you provided beds for the night.  
    From the 1850s onwards the hotel trade prospered as
adventurous pioneers arrived in Auckland ready to live it up
in the city before moving down country for the real work.
  The hotel became the focus for social and public
gatherings - even some of the first temperance meetings were
held in hotels.   By 1870, Auckland had 91 licensed hotels
serving a population of 13,000, ie one hotel to 143 people
compared to 1982 's ratio of one to 13,500.  
    By the 1880s the city had prospered and the design of
hotels became more and more elaborate.   Outside the city,
they were still built in weatherboard and enclosed with large
verandahs - the Brian Boru in Thames is a classic example -
and in Auckland architects began to echo the grandeur of the
English Victorian hotel, smothering brick and plaster
exteriors with finials, elaborate cornices and a riot of
differently shaped windows all on the same building.  
  photo  
  photo  
    BUT THE PROHIBITION movement was growing in
strength and in 1881 lobbying had forced changes to the
licensing laws.   Now, licences were no longer to be
automatically renewed.  
    In the ensuing years many hotels lost their licences
altogether and fewer and fewer new ones were built.
  Standards in many old hotels declined while social
pressure against the sale of liquor increased.   The
industry lost confidence&semi; entertainment in hotels ceased&semi;
bylaws prohibited the local sale of liquor&semi; bottle stores were
closed down.  
    The temperance movement 's greatest triumph occurred in
1919 when 49.7 per cent of the electorate voted for
prohibition.   But the death blow to the old-style hotel
had already been struck two years earlier when, as a temporary
wartime measure, six o'clock closing was introduced.
  Incredibly, it was to remain in force until 1967.  
  caption  
  photo  
    THE CITY'S OLD hotels were butchered&semi; pleasant
home-like lounges, dining rooms and bedrooms were ripped out
to create beer troughs where swillers could pack themselves in
front of long bar counters designed for quick service.
  Only a few bedrooms were kept in order to fulfil the
licensing requirement.  
    After World War II the introduction of bulk storage
beer systems and plastic tubing allowed beer to be pumped
straight into the glass.   Service became even faster.  
    The poet A. R. D. Fairburn, no stranger to the glass,
was moved to comment that   "walking into some of our
city bars, the stranger from abroad might be forgiven for
wondering how long it will be before a complete circular
system of beer drinking is introduced, the pumping apparatus
on the bar being connected up to the urinal on the rear
wall"  .  
    The appeal of prohibition diminished rapidly during
the 20s&semi; the unforeseen negative consequences of six o'clock
closing were to be just as significant.
  Architecturally, the pub lost sight of its heritage
and uncivilised behaviour became the accepted norm: the
convivial pub atmosphere conducive to social drinking
evaporated in favour of an emphasis on rapid dispensing and
consumption.  
    Gradually, as a result of these profound social
changes, a myth grew up: it came to be believed that the New
Zealand pub was a place where social barriers came down, where
men of different colour, creed and social standing could
congregate on equal terms.  
    Rob MacGregor, author of a book with the rather
laboured title of   Around New Zealand In Eighty
Beers  , observed that   "the Kiwi pub is a centre
where the working man can condemn the rich and the rich can
condemn the rich and everyone can condemn the breweries.
    There is so much freedom of speech in a New Zealand
hotel that many an overseas visitor has gone home thinking
that New Zealand pub patrons are Nazis, Communists, saboteurs,
wife beaters and horse racing promoters, not forgetting
Members of Parliament, income tax inspectors and film
stars.  "    
    But the atmosphere of an apparent happy equality could
all too easily become charged with an ugly and extremely
volatile intolerance should a man declare that he was a
homosexual, an academic, a conscientious objector - or worse,
that he preferred sherry to beer.  
    In 1961, tavern licences were introduced, ending
the need for unprofitable accommodation units.   A second
period of interior butchery began as entire internal layouts
were removed and refitted to cater for the new profit-oriented
methods of bar operation.   Finally, in 1967, came the
return of 10 o'clock closing.  
    The "booze barn" emerged as the new hotel form as the
breweries attempted to cash in on the new-found freedoms of
late-night drinking and entertainment.   The city 's old
Victorian hotels were now an anachronism and were again
"upgraded" as huge lounge bars were grafted on to existing
premises.  
    The 1962 Sale of Liquor Act entrusted the
administration of matters to do with licensed premises to the
Licensing Control Commission, a body of four persons
recommended by the minister of justice and appointed by the
governor general.   They presided over a decade of dramatic
changes with special licences granted to restaurants,
theatres, cabarets, airports and even passenger trains.   It
seemed as though drinking might yet become a sophisticated
social pleasure again.  
    Throughout the 1970s, hotel renovation and
refurbishment continued, with Lion Breweries pioneering the
successful pseudo-colonial Cobb and Co restaurant chain in an
attempt to bring the family back into the pub.  
    Bistro bars and other food services appeared in
bars, including the Victorian hotels, as did bands and other
forms of entertainment.   Garden bars, saloon bars and
restaurant bars were established as the hotel industry tried
to beat the competition from the new licensed clubs. 
  photo  
  caption  
  Gradually, specialised bars began to encourage social
segregation&semi; the so-called "great leveller", the public bar, a
remnant from the days of the six o'clock swill, ceased to have
its former appeal.  
    Because the hotel industry was controlled by
monopolising breweries, a ghastly standardisation had
destroyed any feeble remnants of individuality in matters of
decor.   Some hotels, struggling for an identity, sent
experts to England to analyse English pubs, which they
then copied here with often ludicrous results.   Others
broke out in a rash of lime and coffee-coloured paint,
striated plywood, chrome furniture and fluorescent
lighting.  
    Now that the old egalitarian myth has become less
potent, the pub has become increasingly socially stratified.
  Even within individual pubs, class segregation occurs.
  Today, a tour of the old Victorian pubs on the Hobson
Street ridge reveals that another social revolution is
underway.   Some of them, like DB 's Aurora and Prince
Arthur, are barely keeping up&semi; others like the Empire, the
Shakespeare and the Albion are flourishing.    
    THE SHAKESPEARE on the corner of Albert and
Wyndham Streets is the work of the well-known architect Thomas
Mahoney.   He designed the hotel for publican Thomas Foley
whose parents had owned the old wooden Shakespeare Hotel
formerly on the same site.   The new hotel was built in
1898, taking six months instead of the projected four because
the builders had to send to Melbourne for more bricks.  
    According to a long description of the hotel in
  Industries Of New Zealand  , published in the same
year, the Shakespeare offered its guests   "every
convenience compatible with a first-class hostelry... the most
carping critic would find it a difficult matter to place his
finger on a fault of omission or commission in the general
furnishing and   menage   of the
establishment"  .  
    The large dining room on the second floor seated 50
guests at large or small   tete-a-tete   tables&semi;
different dishes were conveyed from the kitchen below by a
dumb waiter.   There were a number of drawing rooms, the
finest of which was also on the 
  photo  
  photo  
  caption  
second floor and was furnished in light blue plush and the
walls draped with a neutral tint to give a bright and cheerful
appearance.   A handsome Brinsmead piano stood in one corner
and easy chairs were scattered about.  
    There were over 20 single and double bedrooms finished
with pretty dressing tables and chests of drawers.   The
main entrance of the hotel was on Albert Street so guests
could proceed to their apartments   "without passing
through, or in proximity to, the bar.     This is an
excellent arrangement for ladies and families.  "  
  The magnificent wooden staircase, the work of a Mr
Fairweather, was handsomely balustraded in polished kauri
and lit with a large stained-glass window.   The private bar
was also kauri-lined to distinguish it from the "assembly
room".  
    Today the staircase is painted over, though the
original stained-glass window is still in place.   There are
no bedrooms or formal dining rooms now: the many regular
patrons are attracted above all by the ales and lagers brewed
on the premises.   There 's King Lear Old Ale, Macbeth 's Red
Ale, Falstaff 's Red Ale, Willpower Stout and Barraclough 's
Lager - the last named after the hotel 's current owner Peter
Barraclough, a former DB man who used to run the Junction in
Thames.  
    Manager Brett Kennedy says that the hotel aims to
satisfy the needs of three different clienteles: the
workers from nearby construction sites go down to the
basement 's Avon Bar&semi; at street level there 's Hathaway 's for
  "anyone and everyone"  , while upstairs the
lounge bar offers a more restful environment for business
people during the day, although at night it resounds to music
from Al Hunter or Beaver, among others.   Until quite
recently, Hathaway 's used to be an old-style public bar, but
in order to defeat the connotation of violence and boorish
behaviour associated with such places, it has been turned
into a brasserie.  
    Young lunchtime patrons of Hathaway 's delightedly
exhibit their ample paunches and tell you how devoted they are
to the beer served at the Shakespeare, claiming that it is
impossible to be hung over after drinking it.  
    Tourists interested in brewing also flock into the
Shakespeare where they can watch the whole process taking
place.  
    THE AURORA on the corner of Federal Street and
Victoria Street West is now a DB hotel.   In 1905 the
well-known publican Paddy Gleeson demolished the old wooden
Aurora Tavern, which was first licensed in 1852, and built a
new Aurora in the highest Edwardian Baroque style.   Its
many decorative features are conspicuous today, having been
rather vulgarly picked out in white against a grim
charcoal-coloured background.  
    Paddy Gleeson was born in Tipperary, Ireland, in 1839,
but by the age of 14 he had arrived in Australia where he is
said to have fought in the battle of Eureka Stockade at
Ballarat.   After working in various goldfields, he came to
New Zealand, settling first in New Plymouth then
Auckland, where he remained until his death in 1916.  
    His first hotel was the Albion, built in 1864, which
was followed by Gleeson 's (now drastically altered and known
as the Bridgeway Tavern) in 1880, then the Prince Arthur, the
City and finally the Aurora.   A great character, Gleeson
always led the annual St Patrick 's Day Parade in the Domain
mounted on a horse and wearing grey morning dress.   Some
years before his death he gave the Aurora to his daughter
Catherine as a wedding present
  photo   
and it remained in the family into the early 1970s.  
    The Aurora is in a sad state today, like the Prince
Arthur, also now a DB hotel, the walls of its public bar are a
nicotine-stained dirty cream colour and decorated with greatly
enlarged, out-of-focus rugby photographs left over from the
era of six o'clock closing.   In one corner a waitress
smears sliced white bread with canned sweet corn in readiness
for the toasted sandwich machine.   In the kitchen out the
back a bath of fat bubbles efficiently, providing chips to go
with the beers.   There is a steady stream of traffic from
the TAB located through a door in the public bar.   The holy
trinity of rugby, racing and beer lives on.  
    The Aurora 's two upper floors are almost derelict
except for a thin layer of white paint which has been splashed
along one corridor where a few staff members have their rooms.
  The top floor is unfit for human habitation and there
appear to be no plans to make it so.  
    THE PRINCE ARTHUR, on the corner of Hobson Street
and Wellesley Street, may have two satellite discs on the
roof, but things are little better there.   Although this
hotel has the most elegant facade of all Auckland 's Victorian
pubs, the DB image of 20 years ago dominates the interior.
  The carpet is a coloured floral, the entrance a nasty
combination of orange/red and murky chocolate brown.  
    Upstairs is Keith 's Bar which has a large video screen
at one end and offers a variety of foods including
  "Eggs and Chips, Sausages, Onions, Tomatoes, and
Oysters when available"  .   The public bar at 11.30am
on a Wednesday morning is a desolate scene of old men in
windbreakers sitting smoking, alone and silent in
contemplation of their jugs of beer.   The radio blares
commercials.  
    As at the Aurora, the original layout upstairs remains
intact, with the difference that it is inhabited by
permanent residents and staff.   In 1969, patrons of the
hotel presented Mangere Hospital and Training School with a
new children 's bus bought with funds raised by
raffles.  
    THE ALBION, another of Paddy Gleeson 's hotels, is
directly across the road.   In 1973, when it was owned by
Consolidated Hotels and being transformed into a
four-storey, seven-bar booze barn, old regulars attested to
the fact that Paddy 's ghost was seen frequently about the
building.  
    Consolidated 's general manager, a Mr W. Dunlop, had a
praiseworthy attitude towards older hotels and regretted the
cannibalisation that had gone on during 
  photo  
  caption  
the six o'clock closing days.   He told the   Herald  
that although the Albion was   "sturdy but a bit run
down"  , it could become a genuine entertainment centre
again.     "People nowadays expect their pub to
provide more than just a drink,"   he said.
      "They look for a well-rounded night out, with
entertainment and perhaps dancing thrown in."      
    Dunlop went to England to look at the pub scene there
and came back convinced that the hotel should be refurbished
along traditional English lines.   Consolidated sought the
advice of Vic Jones, a British hotel expert from the London
firm Bass Charington, and hired him to come to Auckland
specifically to tear out the insides of the 90-year-old
pub and restore its Victorian character.  
  photo  
  photo  
  caption  
    The ground-floor Cottage Bar, modelled on an early
English taproom, is still there.   Its original windows were
pulled out and replaced by curved ones.   Heavy roof rafter
beams were installed after Jones did a deal with the harbour
board who supplied them cheaply from the old piles of Freyberg
Wharf.   The walls and ceiling were belaboured with plaster
to create the "authentic" Olde English atmosphere&semi; horse
brasses were festooned about the place.  
    There are still distinct remnants of this anglicising
phase, though on Tuesday nights now the Cottage Bar resounds
to the revels of Irish Night.   The spacious Buttery
restaurant downstairs, a popular lunch spot, also has some
Elizabethan touches which survive from the
  '  70s  '   "new look".  
    Peter Keen bought the hotel in July 1988, removed the
bars upstairs and turned the Albion back into a hotel again.
  A chippie by trade, he 's spent 20 years in the liquor
business and knows what he 's doing.   His building skills
came in handy when it came to demolishing the old bars and
replacing them with 20 clean, modernised rooms which are
now let at very reasonable rates.   They are decorated in
soft pastel shades, a relief from the oppressive,
predominantly wine-coloured decor of the stairs and
corridors.  
    Keen picks up tourists from the airport, and many of
them keep coming back at various points in their travels
around the country.   People visiting Auckland on training
courses also like the hotel 's chatty, welcoming
atmosphere: Keen aimed at a 70 per cent occupancy rate but has
found that it rarely falls below 80 per cent.  
    THE CITY HOTEL further down Hobson Street has
just come through a very bad patch.   Long associated with
crime, drunkenness and violence, it hit the headlines
earlier this year when there was a vicious murder in the car
park adjoining the hotel.  
    The big corner bar has recently been revamped into the
Soho Bar, where amid palms, wooden garden furniture, black
walls and calico curtains you can chat to the interesting
foreigners who drift down from the Globetrotter
  backpackers'   accommodation on the two floors
above: in the evenings you can see the likes of Hammond
Gamble or Mike Farrell perform.   The old public bar doesn't
have a very savoury reputation and will shortly be changed
into a private bar.  
    Manager Matthew Williams used to work at the Empire
along the road.   He says that the Soho Bar doesn't intend
to 
  photo  
  caption  
compete with its up-market rival.     "We 're not in
the same league,"   he says.     "  For one
thing, our prices are cheaper.   Auckland 's bar scene is
tired and monotonous.   We want to attract the TV people
back again, too."      
    THE EMPIRE has probably had the best luck of all
the city 's Victorian hotels.   In 1982 Simon Woolley bought
it from Hancocks and transformed it into a place where the
young well-heeled were happy to eat and be seen.   Then he
sold it to partners Kevin and Tom Lane and Bill Boyd, who also
own and operate the Exchange in Parnell.   Last year the
already architecturally unrestrained Empire was repainted in a
fashion which comes close to gilding the lily.  
    Its interior has been reorganised by promotions
manager Myles Van Urk, who has assembled an enormous display
of sporting and musical memorabilia including Grant Fox 's
boots, Chris Lewis 's 1983 Wimbledon racquet, Martin Crowe 's
one-day cricket gear and Alison Roe 's shoes and medal from the
1981 Boston marathon.   There 's a dress worn by Madonna,
Annie Lennox 's flaming red bra and an entire wall of guitars
played and signed by visiting musical luminaries.  
    The Empire has a well-dressed lunchtime clientele,
many of them from across the road at TVNZ.   Ginette
McDonald recently lunched there in company on two
successive days (soda water with straw, salad and Winfields),
while PR princess Angela Griffen and her no less high-profile
business partner Catherine Saunders frequently repair to a
table to power lunch and consume their habitual bottle of
Vidal 's Chardonnay.  
    The Empire 's owners believe in keeping their
night-time patrons constantly amused with a range of
special-theme occasions - like a Crazy Shorts Party each
Christmas and, most recently, on Wednesday nights, a
Bigger Than Texas evening when Steinlager is $2.50 and the
men win prizes for riding a mechanical bull, Texas-style.
  Currently there are plans to turn the entire top floor of
the hotel into a new bar and a restaurant of the
brasserie/grill variety.  
    Those who know and love these old Victorian corner
pubs need no convincing of their unique place in Auckland 's
social and architectural history.   Like so many other
buildings of the same era now gone forever, they are part of
the city 's memory.   Some, like the Empire and the Albion,
will make the transition into the 1990s easily&semi; the fate of
others is less certain.  
    The Leopard in Freeman 's Bay has undergone a refit
and just reopened as the Spotty Dog.   Already the Queen 's
Head in Queen Street has been swallowed up in a tower-block
development of unparalleled vulgarity&semi; the Alexandra in
Federal Street is about to suffer a similar though, one hopes,
less crass fate.   These buildings may be smaller and less
impressive than the Civic Theatre or the Auckland City Art
Gallery, but their loss would be just as
crucial.    
  

      Waitangi    
    Most parts of New Zealand that were major ports in
the 1840s and 1850s have long since buried their raw, colonial
character under tons of asphalt, concrete, steel and plate
glass.   Not so Waitangi, Chatham Island, which still looks
astonishingly as it did in the mid-nineteenth century: a
cluster of buildings on the foreshore and a hotel on the site
where one has stood for more than 130 years.  
    True, there are more amenities now than previously.
  A solid wharf pushes into the bay off Hanson Point.
  And the plateau above the beach is dotted with a general
store, a post office, a community hall, a county office and a
cluster of houses.   But the rawness remains.   There is
space between the buildings, there are no advertising
hordings, people appear and disappear in twos and threes, and
the smell of salt, seaweed and fish still wafts up strongly
from the shore.  
    At the time of the Ati Awa invasion Waitangi was a
Moriori village known as Waiteki.   It was one of the first
communities to be coveted and taken over by the Maori
colonists.   They Maorified the name to Waitangi and -
according to Alexander Shand 's informants - laid out the
Moriori inhabitants along the beach,   'in length over a
quarter of a mile ... they were ... touching one another, the
parent and the child ...     Some of the women with stakes
thrust into them were left to die in their
misery.  '    
    This massacre, by which Ngati Tama asserted their
right of ownership by conquest, had a curious sequel.   Four
years later, Richard Cropping, a whaler, observed a London
surgeon from another visiting ship going to Waitangi beach
each day with, 
    an assistant, a small hammer and a bag, knocking
the teeth out of the numerous skulls laying about the beach,
belonging to the original islanders.     I have often
thought while watching them, that some English beauty might
some time be praised for her beautiful teeth at the expense of
some of the poor Chatham Islanders ...        
    Between the conquest and Cropping 's visit, Waitangi
had again changed hands.   The Ngati Tama village there had
been bombarded and razed by the crew of a French warship,
  Heroine  , in retaliation for the loss of the
  Jean Bart  .   Then, because Waitangi was favoured
by visiting ships as a watering and provisioning stop (the
soil behind the beach was extensive and well suited to growing
potatoes), Ngati Mutunga from Whangaroa attacked the
reconstructed village and drove Ngati Tama out.  
    Pomare, the principal Ngati Mutunga chief, then
commenced to  'sell' Chatham Island to the New Zealand Company
agents who had arrived on a buying mission while the fighting
was in progress (the sale was eventually disallowed by the New
Zealand Government and the Chathams were proclaimed part of
New Zealand in 1842).  
    Richard Cropping had arrived at Waitangi for the
second time in mid-1840, on the whaler   Endeavour:  
      A change had come over the scene since my
last visit to Chatham Islands for then you could buy a
boatload of potatoes for a few pounds of tobacco and a large
pig for a common shirt and the natives after you all day to
buy&semi; but now they did not care to barter at all.   The
reason was a short time previous to our arrival there had been
a barque, the   Cuba,   from London come to buy
the island ...   The barque had brought everything that was
likely to take the   natives'   eye: Guns of all
descriptions from old brown Bess to the fanciful double
barrel, pistols of all kinds, accordions, flutinas,
  Jews'   harps, violins, powder in any quantity, clothes,
rum, brandy, wines and all and everything you could mention.
  It was ludicrous in the extreme to see the Maoris, men,
women and children dressed in all kinds of styles, if such
could be called style.   Topboots, white bell-toppers,
frock-coats, vests, white shirts and other kinds of rig and in
all imaginable ways that would have put Beau Brummell in a fix
if he could have seen them.   In the warries [whares] were
any amount of barrels of powder, as many as ten or twenty in
some, with the Maoris sitting smoking all kinds of fancy pipes
and playing on all kinds of instruments ...      
  This year, 1840, may have seen the peak of   ships'  
visits to Waitangi (as many as 50 vessels are believed to have
called).   This was by no means the end of maritime traffic
to and from the port, however.   Within a few
years  photo   
  caption  
  caption    drawing  
Ngati Mutunga were growing potatoes on an even larger scale
than before, and wheat.   They exported huge quantities of
this produce to the New Zealand mainland, to Australia, and
even to California.   An estimated 8000 tonnes of potatoes
were shipped from the Chathams between 1845 and 1856&semi; and
between 1856 and 1858 vessels took an average of 1280 tonnes
of potatoes and 770 bushels of wheat per year.   More than
half of these quantities were grown around and shipped from
Waitangi.  
    Income from these sales was used to buy printed cloth,
clothing, flour, rice, tea, sugar, spiritous liquor
(especially rum) and horses.   The horse buying, breeding
and racing on the island became highly competitive, led by the
Waitangi chiefs Pomare, who died in 1851, and his son Wiremu
Naera.   For all these touches that could have been regarded
as luxuries, however, the inhabitants of the settlement
continued to live in ponga whares.   There were, as yet, no
grand houses on the Chathams.  
    By the late 1850s this era of relative prosperity was
waning.   The appointment of a resident magistrate in 1855
meant that goods landed on the island were now subject to
duty, which made trading there a less appealing prospect than
it had been previously.   In addition, Moriori slaves, who
had done most of the potato cultivation for their Maori
masters, were  photo   
  caption  
being progressively released.   And Frederick Hunt on Pitt
was attracting much of the whaling trade by advertising in
American publications and remaining outside of customs
surveillance by virtue of his isolation.  
    Ships continued to call at Waitangi, however, albeit
in smaller numbers.   The island 's first hotel, owned by the
chief Toenga Te Poki, opened on the beach in the early 1860s.
  The loss of sporadic trade was compensated for by the slow
growth in the number of European settlers, and by an increase
in visitors from the mainland.   One such visitor, Henry
Travers, reported in 1864:
      Waitangi is the chief ... settlement on the
Chatham Islands, and is situated at the south  -  eastern
extremity of Petre Bay, which forms an indentation some forty
miles broad on the south-west side of the island ...   A
small but deep river flows into the bay close to Waitangi,
washing on its western side the foot of some low ridges of
reddish sandstone.   The river drains a considerable tract
of hilly ground on the south side of the bay and is also fed
by a stream running from a lagoon close to the settlement.
  Were it not for a bar at its mouth, vessels from forty to
fifty tons burthen might enter it, as inside the bar the water
is deep for a considerable distance inland.
  The huts of the Maoris and the residence of Captain
Thomas [second magistrate] are situated on low ground on the
east side of the river.   The Maori huts are built of fern
posts lashed together with supplejacks, and thatched with toi
grass, resembling in all respects those found in the old pahs
in New Zealand.   Captain Thomas 's residence is built in the
same way with the exception of the roof, which is shingled&semi;
but it is plastered inside and out with clay, and whitewashed.
  A chapel belonging to the Church of England natives is a
very handsome specimen of their style of building: the inside
walls are lined with fronds of tree ferns, from which the
pinnules have been stripped, and which are interwoven in a
curious manner with leaves of Phormium tenax [flax].   The
roof is braced with board having white scrolls painted on a
red ground.   The outside walls and roof are closely and
smoothly thatched with toi grass.   The building is about
fifty feet long and nearly thirty broad, and about the same
height to the top of the roof.   There is a smaller building
used as a church by the Roman Catholic natives, built in the
same style, but more highly decorated and more neatly
kept.
  The population of Waitangi, including a few Moriori
slaves, numbers about one hundred  photo   
  caption  
and fifty all told.   Their huts are surrounded by
well-fenced paddocks, laid down to English grasses, but now
almost smothered by the common daisy, mustard, and dock, which
are spreading rapidly over the whole island.   The natives
generally possess considerable numbers of horses, cattle, and
pigs, which run, in common, on the open lands and in the bush.
  They cultivate large quantities of potatoes, maize,
pumpkins, and onions, which they supply to American whaling
ships resorting to the islands, and occasionally export to New
Zealand ...        
    The picture presented is something of an idyll, and it is
scarcely surprising that the likes of the Ritchies, Edward
Chudleigh, Walter Hood and Charlie Kerr were drawn to settle
on the island over the next few years.   What was less than
idyllic, however, was the fact that Captain Thomas returned
from a visit to the mainland in 1866 with 43 Maori 'prisoners
of war' - plus 25   prisoners'   wives and children and a
guard of 26 men.   More prisoners arrived by the end of the
year.   Chatham Island was being turned into a penal
colony.  
    At first the presence of the prisoners had little
adverse effect on island life.   They built a redoubt and a
prison, and huts for their own accommodation.   They began
to work for the settler farmers, hewing out roads, drains and
wells.   The guards, meanwhile, became part of local life,
visited the hotel for entertainment and refreshment, and tried
to court the local ladies.   One of them, immeasurably
bored, contributed this verse to the short-lived   Chatham
Island Chronicle.  
        Chathams land of milk and honey,
  Gold and silver (coined money),
  Land of bushes, swamps and mountains,
  Splendid bridges&semi; but no fountains ...
  When evening steals its veils of grey
  Across the sun 's declining ray
  I wander forth to take the air
  On Chatham 's lovely maids to stare,
  Such sweet and dear angelic creatures
  With snuff and butter color 'd features.
  Approach them with a grace so gay,
  They sneer and korero 'Aue'.
  My heart turns from them with a sigh
  To where my native country lie,
  No dusky form roams o'er her plains
  Nor is there Hau-Hau there in chains
...        
    By 1868, there were signs that the prisoners were
deeply discontented with their lot.   Some, like Te Kooti
Rikirangi, who had become their spiritual leader, had been
arrested unfairly (the accusation was that they were 'Hauhau'
- a generic term to condemn any Maori believed to have taken
up arms against the New Zealand Government).   The remainder
were influenced by him and began to cease their cooperation
with the authorities: breaking the tools with which they
were supposed to be working, for example, and by taking an
inordinately long time to complete work.    photos  
  captions  
    Their opportunity to escape came after the Government
recalled most of the guard to put down a suspected Fenian
uprising on the West Coast of the South Island.   In July
1868, Te Kooti sent for the prisoners working on outlying
farms.   They took over the redoubt and tied up the guards,
killing one in the scuffle.   Then they went through the
settlement, seizing guns, money, clothes and other items they
thought might aid their survival on the mainland.   Mrs
Alexander, wife of the proprietor of Mangoutu House, showed
great presence of mind by seizing the hotel 's hoard of 300
sovereigns and hurling them into a kettle of boiling water,
where they were not discovered.  
    Meanwhile another group of prisoners seized the vessel
  Rifleman  , then under charter to Walter Hood, put its
passengers ashore, and forced the crew to transport the
convicts to the East Coast of the North Island, where they
began a guerilla war against Government forces that lasted
another four years.    photo  
  caption  
    In the same year, most of the remainder of Chatham
Island 's Maori population also returned to the mainland, to
establish their rights to ancestral lands at court sittings in
Taranaki.   In 1869, for the first time, the European
population of the island (120) was larger than that of Maori
and Moriori combined.   And it was to remain so for another
40 years.  
    In 1870, however, some of the Maori began to trickle
back, for much the same reason they had left: Native Land
Court sittings were to determine ownership of the Chatham
Islands.   Preliminary hearings in 1868 had begun to deal
with European claims, but the court found that scarcely any
Pakeha held what could be considered correct title, and
ordered extensive surveying.  
    By 1870 the major surveys were complete and hearings
began on 14 June in the courthouse on Waitangi beach.   The
building was exceedingly small (four by six metres) and the
judge ordered the construction of a temporary shelter outside
to accommodate spectators and waiting witnesses.  
    For the next ten days the major question - who owned
the Chatham Islands - was argued out by Maori and Moriori
witnesses.   The outcome was a rout for the Moriori.
  Judge Rogan found in favour of the Ngati Tama and Ngati
Mutunga proposition that the Maori owned the Chatham Islands
by right of conquest.  
    He awarded 58,517 hectares of land on Chatham to the
Maori claimants (97 per cent) and 1,640 to the Moriori in
eight small reserves.   In almost every case the Maori
retained the land with extensive 'clears' that was suitable
for grazing and leasing.   Much of the Moriori reserves was
forested or wetlands.   In subsequent decisions, the
offshore islands with their precious birding rights were also
awarded to Maori claimants.  
    While much of the Maori land was to be leased to
Europeans, this securing of title gave Chatham Islands Maori a
renewed interest in their holdings and many families returned
to live there in the following decades, rebuilding the
island 's depleted Maori presence.  
    Meanwhile European-inspired development of the
island continued at an accelerated pace.   Prices for wool
were high on the mainland, and farmers  photo   
  caption  
and traders such as Walter Hood and Thomas Ritchie were adding
to the amenities and the recreational options available in
Waitangi.   Ritchie founded the Chatham Islands Jockey Club
in 1873 and later supervised the building of a race course to
the east of the village.   One hundred and sixteen years
later it was the oldest continuously operating racing club in
New Zealand.   Ritchie also initiated annual shooting
competitions on the western end of Waitangi beach.   Other
entrants decided early on that it was best to let Ritchie win,
because the subsequent shout at the pub would then be larger
and longer.  
    Walter Hood had chartered a number of vessels to trade
between the Chathams and the mainland, including the
  Rifleman   at the time of its seizure by Te Kooti.
  In 1882 he procured a 21 year lease of Pomare land
alongside the Nairn River and had William Baucke build him a
two-storeyed combined home and store from imported kauri.
  A visiting English bricklayer raised the chimneys.
  Once finished, in 1886, it was generally thought to be the
finest building on the island.   Hood too contributed to
sporting opportunities by releasing deer and black swans.
  The deer perished but the swans thrived.   He added
blackbirds, starlings and skylarks to the island 's bird
life.   photo     captions     photos     captions    
    Up to 1900, the loading and unloading of
vessels at Waitangi was a difficult and dangerous business,
with surfboats used to ferry goods between ship and shore.
  Things improved somewhat with the building of a jetty down
the western end of the beach in 1900.   David Holmes
described what was then possible:
      Sheep would be put into a race running along
one side of the jetty and loaded into the surfboat.   A
small rope sling was put around each animal in the boat and,
on arrival at the ship 's side, a rope attached to the ship 's
winch was threaded through these slings and the animals
hoisted aboard six or seven at a time.   Once in the hold,
they were penned and the slings removed.     SS Tees
  took 1300 sheep a trip and some chartered vessels 2000 or
more.   Fifty tons of cargo a day and 200 sheep an hour was
considered good going.
  The work of unloading and loading the ship generally
began at 5.30 a.m. and was carried on until finished,
sometimes into the early hours of the morning.   If it was
thought that the work would take two or three days to
complete, the hours were 5.30 a.m. to 9 or 10 p.m., conditions
permitting.   There were no smokos, but a one-hour break for
breakfast, dinner and tea ...        
    The big days on the island were the once or
twice-yearly arrival of the large steamers.   The Mangoutu
Hotel flew a flag on steamer days, and it was a condition of
the hotel 's licence that a light be shown in its window at
night around the time that ships were due.   David Holmes
remembers the crowds and the excitement:
      Everyone rode a horse and it was a common
sight on steamer days to see scores of these animals saddled
and hitched to a long rail on the foreshore while their owners
were busy in the bar, shop or post office, or merely sitting
around on the sea wall.   There were invariably dozens of
dogs too and it was nothing to see 20 or 30 of them chasing
gulls off the beach, creating a terrible din in the process
...
  These steamer days and other gala occasions placed a
strain on the catering facilities at the hotels, 50 or 60
diners sometimes lining up for a meal.   Many required tea
and breakfast as well.   Those coming from great distances
would stay overnight.   The tariff in the 1920s was two
shillings per meal and the same for a bed.
  Whisky was 12/6 per bottle and beer 1/6 to 1/9.
  The bulk of the beer came in 18 and 27 gallon casks.
  The hotel cooking was done on a double oven burning wood
...   It was kept in milk and butter by the proprietor
milking three or four cows.   Fowls too were kept there, and
meat and potatoes procured from nearby farmers.   The menu
was usually meat and potatoes three times a day, with bread
and tea.
  Right up until 1948 the Chathams was a 'proclaimed'
area, which meant that no Maori [or Moriori], half-caste to
full-blood, was allowed liquor for consumption off hotel
premises, nor was anyone else allowed to buy it for them.
  The penalty for breaking this law was severe.   But
Chatham Islanders were drinkers and they found ways to get
around the rule, especially for weddings and
tangis.        
    One who got around it was Tommy Solomon.   Shortly after
the First World War, Constable G. H. Fry of Waitangi heard
that Solomon was giving away whisky and wine, and he went to
Manukau to investigate.   The rumours were true.   Solomon
had ordered a five-gallon keg of whisky and 12 bottles of port
from Forbes and Company, of Lyttelton.   He had invited his
friends around to share this cache and given away most of the
port.  
    When Constable Fry arrived at Manukau, Tommy offered
him a bottle of port and - when this was refused with horror -
told him that the order had been delivered in error.   Tommy
had wanted five gallons of vinegar and a case of tomato sauce,
he said.   The order had been misunderstood and the whisky
and port was the result.  
      Fry did not believe a word of the story but
undertook to check it out before he prosecuted.   While the
constable was laboriously writing to his colleagues in
Lyttelton, Solomon
    telegramed    telegrammed     Forbes and
Company, at sixpence per word, and asked them to support his
story.   The telegram arrived well ahead of the police and
the company obliged.   Consequently, Constable Fry was
unable to press charges.   Solomon claimed subsequently that
the cost of the telegram had far exceeded that of the likely
fine.  
    The opportunity to send telegrams to New Zealand
was one of a host of facilities that became available in
Waitangi in the twentieth century and
  photo   
  captions    photos  
  captions  
began to modernize island life.   The first telephone link
between Waitangi and Owenga commenced in 1913.   The Radio
Station, which sent and received telegraph messages in morse,
opened the same year.   The Chatham Islands County Council,
with its associated offices and procedures, began functioning
in 1925 (though the islands still came under the ultimate
authority of the New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs).
  The two-roomed cottage hospital, staffed by a permanent
doctor and nurse appointed by the Canterbury Hospital Board,
opened in 1927.   A Catholic church, St Theresa 's, was built
in 1929.  
    The most important innovations came about as a result
of the construction between 1931 and 1934 of a major and fully
serviced wharf.   This allowed ships to tie alongside, and
raised the rate of cargo handling and the size and quantity of
goods that could be sent from ship to shore.   Its
coincidence with the existence of the new county council led
to elementary road construction and the appearance of the
first cars and trucks on the island.   This in turn led to a
centralizing of all the island 's shipping activities on
Waitangi.   Finally, when island landowners proved unwilling
or unable to pay rates on land, an additional rating system
was imposed on goods that crossed the wharf, thus saving the
county council from bankruptcy.  
    Technological improvements continued.   A
radio-telephone link with New Zealand was established in 1953,
and an island-wide internal telephone system in 1962.   The
locally owned cooperative meatworks opened at Sandstone in the
hills behind Waitangi in 1968.   Shortly afterwards the
helicopters arrived to move the crayfish.  
    The crayfish boom from the late-1960s until the early
1970s turned out to be the most disruptive, frenetic, and
dangerous period in Chatham Islands history.   It was
lucrative too, but ultimately not for the islanders.   In
this respect, it was a repeat of the experience of the sealing
and whaling eras.  
    The boom began with the accidental discovery by a
mainland boat that the inshore rocks around the Chathams were
infested with crayfish.   It took the unloading of only one
or two hauls for the word to spread and the rush was on.
  Statistics tell part of the story: in 1964 there were no
crayfish exported from the Chathams&semi; in 1965 one boat landed
two tonnes&semi; in 1966 36 boats landed 1271 tonnes&semi; in 1968 120
boats landed 5958 tonnes.   At the height of the rush, there
were 147 vessels chasing crayfish in Chathams waters.   But
by 1969 the tonnage landed had begun to fall.  
    These catches resulted in the opening of eight new
factories on the island (which supplemented the one already
operating at Owenga).   At the peak, some boats had as much
as half-a-million dollars worth of crays on board at one time.
  Seven helicopters lifted full baskets off the boats and
delivered the precious cargoes to the factories.   On slack
days they transported fencing equipment or ferried visitors
around the islands.   Some cowboys even used them to go
muttonbirding at places that had previously been dangerous or
inaccessible, such as the top of Little Mangere Island, 214
metres sheer above the ocean.  
    A proportion of the resulting prosperity rubbed off on
the Chathams.   The islanders had more work available - and
more lucrative work - than they had ever dreamed of.   But
the vast bulk of profits went to the mainland: to the boat
owners, the factory owners, the exporters.   Worse, it was
the islanders who had to cope with the social cost of the
invasion.   Waitangi became the largest fishing port in New
Zealand and its male population trebled in two years.
  Alcoholic consumption was up, crime was up, guns were
toted and shots periodically fired.   Doors could no longer
be left unlocked nor daughters or wives sent unescorted to
fishermen 's parties.  
    On the sea itself, 38 boats were lost during the boom
and with them the lives of 22 fishermen.   The rewards were
high for those who took the risk.   So was the cost.  
    By 1976 the helicopters were gone, all but two of the
factories closed and the population level back to only
slightly more than it had been 10 years before.   The
surviving crayfishing fleet had to accept a two-month closed
season, to allow the crustacea an opportunity to breed.
  The resource had survived, but only just.   Its
continued exploitation has relied on good management and on
policing.  
    Waitangi today, administrative and commercial
centre of the Chathams,  photo   
  captions    photo  
is a quiet community, where the doors turn out to be unlocked
again.   But the signs of its history are there still: from
the boats in the bay, to the buildings on the shore, to the
solid gables of the Hood home, to the ethnically mixed faces
of its residents.   The sight of tall ships, of sealers and
whalers may be gone, as are the tattooed faces of the first
generation of Maori colonists.   But their presence lingers,
along with that of the crayfishermen of the 1960s.   As it
is elsewhere on the Chathams, the past here is always close to
the present.      
  

      Chapter 18  
      PASSENGERS IN PERIL   - WAHINE   AND  
MIKHAIL LERM0NTOV  
    We have become so accustomed to the lure of airline
travel that it is sometimes easy to forget that, even today,
sea transport still moves hundreds of thousands of people
around New Zealand each year.   The Interislander service
links the two islands, Auckland and Wellington 's harbour ferry
services, long neglected, are enjoying a revival, tourist
catamarans and launches are increasing in numbers throughout
the rest of the country and cruise liners are paying New
Zealand more attention each year.  
    Sea travel seems so planned, so safe.   Large
steel-hulled ships, with mind-bogglingly sophisticated
satellite navigation equipment and hourly weather forecasts
over the facsimile should have removed all danger.   Yet, as
the wrecks of the inter-island ferry   Wahine   in 1968
and the Soviet liner   Mikhail Lermontov   in 1986
showed, even the largest and best-maintained ships are immune
neither to the forces of nature nor to rash human actions.  
      'Sleek New   Wahine   is World 's Biggest
Roll-On, Roll-Off Ship,'   proclaimed the headlines in
June 1966 as the Union Company 's latest and largest
Lyttelton-Wellington ferry sailed up Wellington Harbour to
test the new linkspan at the refitted Interisland Wharf.
  For more than 70 years the company 's swift  'steamer
expresses' had criss-crossed the boisterous seas of Cook
Strait virtually without incident and so punctually that some
Wellingtonians boasted they set their watches by the ships.
  Everyone who saw her that day predicted that the
  Wahine   would have an equally long and quiet
career.  
    She certainly looked the part.   At 8944 GRT, she
was one of the world 's largest roll-on, roll-off passenger
ferries.   And she had style!   The sharply raked bow, the
raked masts, the fully enclosed wheelhouse and the prominent
funnel managed to blend the best of the old and the new
aesthetics.   The   Wahine'  s powerful turbo-electric
engines gave her a speedy 21 knots, with several more in
reserve if needed.   The very latest radar and echo-sounders
made her safer than any other ship on the coast.  
    But the   Wahine   was a 'bad luck ship'.
  Her difficulties had started in the shipyard, where labour
disputes had spun out her building time by almost a year.
  Mechanical 'teething
  caption    photo  
problems' and a potentially fatal accident with the gangway at
Lyttelton marred her first year.   Then, in April 1968, came
the disaster that left such an indelible mark on most New
  Zealanders'   memories of the 1960s.  
    It all began in the faraway Coral Sea on 5-6 April
when tropical Cyclone Giselle sprang to life.   In the next
few days, the storm swept down into the Tasman Sea, gathering
intensity.   It passed over the North Island during 9 April,
its winds peaking at more than 100 knots off the Wairarapa
coast.   Wellington, traditionally maligned as one of New
Zealand 's windiest cities, reeled under the impact&semi; rain and
hurricane-force winds battered the city, ripping off roofs,
sinking small craft and testing the city 's emergency
services.  
    These were the appalling conditions into which the
  Wahine   sailed on the morning of 10 April.   The
Union Company 's ferries had punched their way through some
violent storms before and at first the   Wahine'  s
veteran master, Captain Gordon Robertson, was not unusually
concerned.   The meteorologists said that the storm was
abating&semi; with her radar and powerful engines, the
  Wahine   should have been able to get her 610
passengers and 123 crew safely into harbour.  
    But the weather experts got it wrong&semi; the storm swung
south further than predicted.   The   Wahine   was
nosing into harbour early in the morning when, in
deteriorating visibility, her radar 
  photos    caption  
failed at the critical moment, just as she entered the narrow
and rocky entrance to the harbour.   Several strong gusts of
wind then caused her to sheer off course.   Next, a massive
sea struck her on the port side, sending Robertson and his
chief officer flying the length of the wheelhouse.   For 30
minutes they struggled to regain control and head the ship out
to the safety of Cook Strait, but to no avail.   At 6.40 the
  Wahine'  s luck ran out when lookouts called out
  'Rocks ahead!'  , then   'Rocks
astern!'    
     The   Wahine   struck Outer Rock, the
southernmost part of Barrett Reef, tearing open her bottom and
wrecking her engines.   Robertson closed all watertight
doors and dropped anchors but there was now little that anyone
could do to save the helpless ship as she drifted up harbour
completely out of control.   The only ship that could have
done much for her that day was the Union Company 's tug
  Tapuhi   (232 tons, 1945).   Underpowered and rather
long in the tooth, this war-surplus relic attached a towline
to the stricken ferry about 1120 but lost the tow just 20
minutes later.   In danger herself, the   Tapuhi  
wheezed for shelter while crewmen planned a way of towing the
ferry into Worser Bay.   Meanwhile, the   Wahine  
drifted closer to the shore and total destruction.  
    By about noon the   Wahine   had drifted close
to Steeple Rock, off Seatoun, where the last hours of the
drama would be acted out.   For passengers the first real
warning of danger had come at 0610 when the ship graunched her
way across the reef.   Reassured that they were in no
danger, they mustered on B deck 20 minutes later.   For the
rest of the morning they sat around in their lifejackets,
anxious but still hopeful that all would be well.   The ship
had started listing to starboard about 1010 but an
extemporised lunch off Seatoun had offered some temporary
reassurance.    
    An hour later, though, at 1300, the   Wahine  
started to list badly and wallow.   The order to abandon
her, the first given aboard a large New Zealand passenger ship
in over 30 years, came barely 10 minutes later.   Suddenly
shocked and dazed, passengers found themselves climbing
into lifeboats or scrambling over rope ladders down the side
of the ship and into the surging waters.   Leaving a ship,
even one as obviously doomed as the   Wahine,   can be a
terrifying experience, especially if you are elderly, as many
of the ferry 's passengers were.   There was considerable
confusion about which was the starboard side.   The ship 's
list increased dramatically, throwing many off their feet and
making it impossible to launch the port lifeboats.   Some
passengers jumped into the sea, others simply fell.  
    Those who made it into the starboard boats were the
lucky ones.   Even so, with the wind shrieking past and the
rain pelting down, they went through hell before finally
hitting the beach.   Less fortunate were those who ended up
in the frigid water.   Some swam to Seatoun but for most of
those swept towards the rocky, inhospitable coastline on the
eastern side of the harbour, small craft offered the only real
hope of survival.   These eastern shores, beautifully bleak
on even a sunny winter day, are less hospitable than those on
the western side of the harbour.   Virtually unpopulated,
rugged and rocky, they accounted for most of the
  Wahine   casualties, as exhausted swimmers were dashed
against rocks.  
    Rescuers were at hand, although they were greatly
restricted by the sea conditions.   Just before 1400 the New
Zealand Railways ferry   Aramoana   arrived on the
scene.   Although she gave a big psychological boost to
those in the water, her great size kept her at a distance,
launching boats and doing her best to form a breakwater.
  Most of the real rescue work fell to the smaller craft
such as the scow   The Portland,   the RNZNVR launch
  Manga   and private craft.   All had to work hard
because the winds and waves were still strong and the water
chillingly cold.   The first lifeboat was launched at 1330
amid great confusion&semi; by mid-afternoon the first survivors
were coming ashore at Seatoun and volunteers were being
rounded up to bring blankets, clothing, food and tea.
  People from all over the city turned up to help.  
    By the middle of the afternoon, the Wellington Railway
Station, the marshalling station for the frozen, drenched and
battered survivors not injured badly enough to be
hospitalised, resembled a battlefield.   Early newspaper
reports spoke of the possibility of 140 dead or missing&semi; the
final death toll was a still mind-numbing 51.   Most of
those who died were elderly, meeting their end on the rocky
eastern shore where most of the bodies were recovered.  
    New Zealand was stunned.   NZBC camera crews
recorded the shipwreck in a way never before possible and
tributes flooded in from all over the country.   For years
afterwards the television images of the graceful, doomed ship
sliding over onto her side would be a stock shot for the
supposedly swinging   '60s  .  
  captions    photos  
    The inevitable court of inquiry was a more civilised
affair than that for the Erebus tragedy a decade later.   It
cleared the senior officers, the Union Company and the
Wellington Harbour Board of all major charges of wrongdoing.
  It found that the main cause of the   Wahine'  s
loss was that the ship, struck by one of the worst storms in
New Zealand history, sheered off course in zero visibility,
went out of control and struck Barrett Reef, sustaining
serious underwater damage.   The immediate cause of capsize
was free surface water on the vehicle deck.  
    The court also stated that loss of life would have
been much greater had the ship been abandoned off the
entrance.   While criticising Robertson for not warning
shore authorities of the damage sustained by his ship, the
court praised his seafaring skills once he found himself in
trouble.   It also said that it could not criticise his
decision to enter harbour&semi; the storm had changed direction and
character, so much so that the assessment given the ship
at 0500 was no longer valid an hour later when she was
entering the harbour.   It also made a number of
recommendations about ship design (although it could not fault
the   Wahine'  s basic design - she was a superbly built
and well-equipped craft) and recommended that the harbour
board provide a fleet of modern salvage tugs - the 'big reds'
that now dominate port activities.  
    It was all over.   Relatives buried their dead, the
harbour board ordered its tugs, shipping companies sharpened
up shipboard safety procedures and the Union Company ordered a
replacement ship.   That vessel, the   Rangatira  ,
was the last to make the Lyttelton-Wellington run.
  Spiralling fuel and crew costs and competition from air
travel soon spelt the end of the service.   Union sold the
  Maori   without replacing her and handed over the
charter of the   Rangatira   to the Government.   By
1976, the magnificent ship was sailing back to Europe to face
an uncertain future.   Ironically, she had outlasted the
  Wahine   by less than a decade.  
    The   Wahine   was not left to rest in peace.
  The Wellington Harbour Board insisted on her removal&semi;
optimistic salvors talked of refloating the ship intact by
pumping her full of polyurethane foam, but later storms
soon broke her up too badly for this to happen.   And those
storms almost broke the salvors, United Salvage Proprietary
Ltd.   Its chartered coaster,   Holmpark   (588 tons,
1953), assisted by the port floating crane, would be a
familiar sight to Wellingtonians for many years as the company
and its successors struggled to carry out the terms of an
increasingly burdensome contract.  
    Today little remains to mark the dramatic events off
Seatoun 23 years ago.   There are a propeller and a plaque
at Seatoun and the Wellington Maritime Museum and Gallery
boasts a large scale model of the ship in her death throes,
complete with life-boats and struggling swimmers.   In 1990
Lambton Harbour Management Ltd erected one of her masts,
gifted to the museum by a prominent entrepreneur, in a place
of honour in the newly refurbished Frank Kitts Park.  
  caption    photo  
    Souvenirs of the most recent passenger ship loss may
also be seen around Wellington, although less conspicuously
displayed.   They are lifeboats from the Soviet liner
  Mikhail Lermontov,   which became New Zealand 's
biggest shipwreck in February 1986 when she foundered in Port
Gore in the Marlborough Sounds after striking rocks.  
    The stylish, white-hulled   Mikhail Lermontov  
was no stranger to New Zealand waters.   The last of the
five   Ivan Franko   class (the others are the   Ivan
Franko, Aleksandr Pushkin, Tara Shevenko   and   Shota
Rustaveli  ) built at Wismar in East Germany between 1963
and 1972, the   Mikhail Lermontov   (which dated from
1972) had made many voyages to New Zealand cruising for the
hard Western currency that her owners coveted.   She was
big.   Some 19,872 GRT and 176 metres long, when built she
could accommodate 750 one-class passengers and a crew of
300.   Twin 21,000 shp (shaft horsepower) Sulzer diesels
pushed her along at 20 knots.   Just four years before her
final voyage, Hapag-Lloyd 's Bremerhaven shipyard had rebuilt
her accommodation areas to take 550 passengers in greater
comfort and had transformed her into the Soviet Union 's
prestige liner.   In her new guise she measured 20,352
tons.  
    In February 1986 she was in the middle of a four and a
half month cruising season for travel firm CTC Lines of
Sydney.   Nine 11-day cruises were planned, together with a
41-day Asian voyage.   She had visited Auckland and Tauranga
before arriving at Wellington on the morning of 15 February.
  After giving her passengers a day exploring the sights of
the capital, the ship pulled away from the Overseas Passenger
Terminal about midnight, bound for Picton.   There she would
spend the morning and part of the evening before starting the
return journey to Sydney via the scenic highlight of the tour,
Milford Sound.  
    The ship left Picton at 1510.   Marlborough Harbour
Board harbourmaster Captain Don Jamison (who also held a
pilot 's 
  photo    caption  
licence for Milford Sound) was on the bridge, pointing out
places of historic interest as he took the big vessel through
Ship Cove on her run up Queen Charlotte Sound out to the open
sea.   At 1635 the master, Captain Vladislav Vorobyov,
retired to his cabin, leaving instructions to be called back
to the bridge when the   Mikhail Lermontov   reached
Ship Cove.   He was notified at 1700 but he did not
reappear, effectively leaving Jamison in charge.  
    As the ship neared the head of the sound, she was
steering a course of 040&deg;T, which should have
taken her well clear of trouble.   When the passage between
Cape Jackson and its offshore lighthouse opened up, Jamison
ordered the helmsman to   'port
10&deg;'  .   On hearing this, second mate
Sergey Gusev warned chief navigator Sergey Stephanischlev that
Jamison 's course was taking the ship into danger.
  Stephanischlev queried Jamison but was told that the
pilot was merely taking the ship closer to Cape Jackson in
order to give passengers a better look.   When the
clearly worried Stephanischlev again questioned the wisdom of
Jamison 's move at 1734, he was informed that the pilot
intended to take the ship through the passage.
  Stephanischlev neither sent for the master nor overruled
Jamison 's order.  
    By now it was probably too late, anyway.   The
  Mikhail Lermontov   swung from 040&deg;
through north to approximately 300&deg; and headed
through the narrow passage, slightly nearer to the shore than
to the light tower.   At 1737, while steaming at a fairly
fast 15 knots, the   Mikhail Lermontov   grounded on her
starboard side, just forward of amidships.   She kept moving
but rapidly developed a list to starboard as water rushed in.
  Vorobyov returned to the bridge and, instantly realising
the gravity of the situation, turned his ship into Port Gore,
intending to beach her before she sank in open water.  
    He almost made it.   The ship 's designers had
allowed for the flooding of two watertight compartments but
four were already awash and the ship 's generating room was
damaged.   By the time Vorobyov beached in Port Gore an hour
later, his ship had lost almost all power and was down by the
bows.   She drifted onto a sandbank and waited for help to
turn up.   Luck was not with her.   The incoming tide
started to push her off the sandbank (for some reason,
Vorobyov had not dropped the anchor) and out into deeper water
in the bay where she sank at 2050.  
    Ships converged on the scene quickly, the leader being
the LPG tanker   Tarihiko   which had been sheltering
off D'Urville Island.   Other rescuers were the coastal
cement carriers   Golden Bay   and   Milburn
Carrier  , the naval patrol boats HMNZS   Taupo   and
HMNZS   Wakakura   and the rail ferry   Arahura  .
  Also dispatched from Wellington were the tugs
  Kupe   and   Toia   (both of which were turned
back), and the police launch   Lady Elizabeth II.    
    Heavy rain and moderate seas did not make the
night-time rescue an easy one.   Nevertheless, the rescue
flotilla picked up all the passengers and crew, except for a
Soviet engineer 
  photo    caption  
believed to have drowned when the   Lermontov   sank,
and transferred them to the   Arahura   and
  Tarihiko  , which brought them across to Wellington
the following morning.   Considering the remoteness of the
accident, the weather conditions and the age of many of the
passengers, it could have been much worse.   Only 11
passengers suffered minor injuries.   By that evening most
of the mainly Australian tourists were on their way out of
Wellington Airport, bound for home.  
    Then the real trouble started.   The Marine Section
of the Ministry of Transport held a preliminary inquiry under
Captain Steve Ponsford.   It found that Jamison, who was
operating the ship just outside the limits of the Marlborough
Harbour Board pilotage area but who nevertheless knew the area
like the back of his hand, had taken the big ship through a
narrow channel 
  caption    photos    caption  
which he knew to have insufficient draught for her.  
    Why he did so, we will never know.   At that point
Minister of Transport Richard Prebble announced that, since
the cause of the accident had been established (it was really
just stating the obvious), no formal inquiry would be held.
  Despite vociferous criticism from several quarters, not
the least from angry passengers who felt that they ought
to know what had happened and why, as well as from the
Christchurch branch of the Company of Master Mariners who felt
that unanswered questions might blacken the reputation of
New Zealand pilots, Prebble refused to budge.   Nothing
would see the light of day.   A Ministry of Transport
decision to release the full transcript of the preliminary
hearing was then blocked by Jamison, who took legal action to
prevent its publication.  
      The Soviets, more open than Prebble, held their
own inquiry.   This put the blame on Jamison 's decision to
take the ship through a dangerous channel which had
insufficient depth of water to take a vessel of the
  Mikhail Lermontov'  s size.   It censured Captain
Vorobyov (who was transferred to a shore job), Stephanischlev
(who, because he was on the bridge at all times, was sentenced
to four   years'   imprisonment) and Gusev (who had his
certificate suspended for two years).  
    Salvage was considered uneconomic and since the wreck
lies in about 30 metres of water far away from normal shipping
channels, it was left in peace.   Between March and August
1986 teams working from the salvage catamaran   Little
Mermaid   recovered the oil from her tanks (about 1300
tonnes) and secured the wreck site.     