  

      OWLS    
    Owls (family Strigidae) are nocturnal predatory birds
with thick soft plumage and forward-facing eyes surrounded by
a round facial disc.   They have big heads with a short
hooked beak, short tails, large rounded wings and strong legs
equipped with talons.   Owls are light relative to their
wing area and they are able to fly buoyantly with little
flapping.   Their eyes are adapted to seeing in low light -
though they cannot see in total darkness - and they have acute
hearing.   The plumage is usually cryptically coloured&semi; most
woodland owls are drab grey or brown.  
      Laughing Owl       (Figure 27)  
    The Laughing Owl or Whekau (  Sceloglaux
albifacies  ) was about twice as big as a Morepork
(  Ninox novaeseelandiae  ) and had longer legs even
allowing for size.   It once occurred throughout the three
main islands of New Zealand: bones have been found at numerous
subfossil sites including Maori kitchen middens.   There is
also a somewhat dubious record of subfossil bones from the
Chatham Islands.   In historical times the Laughing Owl was
known in the North Island from only two museum skins and from
two reliable sightings.   The skins were collected near Mt
Egmont in 1854 and from Wairarapa about 1868 (both are now
lost), and the sightings were at Waikohu near Gisborne in 1889
and near Porirua before 1892.  photo  
  caption  
  In the South Island the Laughing Owl was widely recorded
in Nelson, Canterbury, Otago, Fiordland and on Stewart Island,
but declined rapidly after about 1880.   The last known
specimen was found dead in July 1914 at Blue Cliffs, South
Canterbury.  
    The Laughing Owl was first described in 1844 from a
specimen obtained at Waikouaiti near Dunedin.   The bird was
then fairly common, but relatively few were collected for
museums and 40 years after discovery it was virtually gone.
  Two captive birds in Britain weighed about 600 g each when
examined by G.D. Rowley in the 1870s.   Rowley wrote:
  'More gentle animals could not be&semi; they allow
themselves to be handled without any resentment.'    
    South Island Laughing Owls seemed to prefer forest
edges and rocky areas in open country.   They were strictly
nocturnal and may have been largely ground-feeders.   Their
known foods were lizards, small birds, rodents, earthworms and
insects such as beetles.   The name 'laughing owl' refers to
the weird call, said by T.H. Potts to be a   'loud cry,
made up of a series of dismal shrieks frequently
repeated'  .   A few nests lined with dry grass were
found in crevices among rocks.   The usual clutch was two
eggs.   The eggs were about 50 mm by 40 mm, and pure white
as is typical of owl eggs.  
      NEW ZEALAND WRENS    
      Bush Wren       (Figure 28)  
    The loss of the Bush Wren (  Xenicus longipes  )
is the saddest story in this book because it is the latest New
Zealand bird to die out, and because its demise was realised
in retrospect and attracted no public attention.  
    This bird once occurred throughout New Zealand.
  The North Island subspecies (  Xenicus longipes
stokesii  ) is known from only three museum specimens - two
collected in the Rimutaka Range about 1850 and one from Taupo.
  No other specimens are known, and there have been no
confirmed sightings, but subfossil bones show that it once
occurred more widely in the North Island.   The South Island
race (  Xenicus longipes longipes  ) was widespread at
the time of European settlement, especially in mountain
forest.   Oliver (1955) described it as   'found
sparingly'   and   'not infrequently seen'  
but noted that its range was contracting.   Stead 's Bush
Wren (  Xenicus longipes variabilis  ), named
as  photo  
  caption  
a distinct subspecies by Edgar Stead in 1936, was found on
islands off the south  -  west coast of Stewart
Island.  
    Bush Wrens may have been seen in the South Island as
late as 1968, but there are no later substantiated records.
  By the 1960s Stead 's Bush Wren had become confined to Big
South Cape Island off Stewart Island.   A Ship Rat was first
recorded on Big South Cape in 1955, but this was probably an
isolated individual.   The main increase began in 1962, the
rats having apparently reached the island along the mooring
lines of fishing boats.   Their numbers quickly reached
plague proportions and birds declined rapidly.   Before the
wrens disappeared in 1967, the Wildlife Service transferred
six to nearby rat-free Kaimohu Island.   Two were seen on
Kaimohu in 1972, but an inspection in 1977 and subsequent
visits revealed none.  
    The Bush Wren was about the size of a Goldfinch
(  Carduelis carduelis  ) - much larger than its close
relative the Rifleman, which is still common in many areas.
  Both birds have exceedingly short tails, virtually
invisible from a distance, which gives them a wren-like
appearance.   Both have fine bills for gleaning insects and
other arthropods.   The Bush Wren had particularly long
legs, hence the Latinised name   longipes  .   It was
a weak flier and is said to have been commonly seen among
foliage or feeding on the ground, and seen less often on the
trunks of trees than the Rifleman.  
    Bush Wrens apparently had a habit of bobbing their
head and body, especially on alighting, as does another close
relative, the Rock Wren (  Xenicus gilviventris  ).
  Nests were hidden in cavities among tree roots or in
fallen logs or clumps of fern.   Both parents incubated the
eggs and fed the nestlings.   Bush Wrens had no song, but
gave faint rasping sounds as they moved about or loud cheeps
of alarm.  
      Stephens Island Wren       (Figure
29)  
    The Stephens Island Wren (  Traversia lyalli  ),
as the name suggests, was found historically on this one small
island in the Cook Strait area.   However, subfossil bones
of this species have now been found at several sites on both
the North and South Islands, demonstrating that the Stephens
Island population was a relict of a formerly widespread
species.  
    The story goes that this bird was both discovered, and
soon after eliminated, by a lighthouse keeper 's cat.   Late
in 1894 A.W. Bethune, second engineer on the  photo  
  caption  
government steamer Hinemoa, showed Walter Buller some bird
skins from Stephens Island which he procured when his boat
visited the island in connection with the new lighthouse.
  Among the birds was a Stephens Island Wren brought in by a
cat.   Buller recognised it as a new species and wrote a
paper, published in Britain in April 1895, naming it
  Xenicus insularis  .   Meanwhile the cat had caught
more wrens.   One of the lighthouse keepers, David Lyall,
sent them to the dealer Henry Travers, who sold nine specimens
to Walter Rothschild in Britain, for what the latter regarded
as a high price.   Rothschild 's paper describing the new
species (  lyalli  ) and placing it in the new genus
  Traversia   (both names honouring his associates)
appeared in December 1894.   By the international rules of
zoological nomenclature, Rothschild 's name had priority over
Buller 's, much to the latter 's annoyance at the time.
  Lyall twice saw the bird alive and was seemingly the only
European to do so.   About 17 specimens were collected, all
at the end of 1894, and a dozen of these are still available
in museums.  
    The wings were short and rounded, the body plumage
soft, loose and rail-like.   Recent research by Phil
Millener has shown that the Stephens Island Wren had such
reduced wings as to be totally flightless - the only such
perching bird (passerine) known.   Lyall reported that the
wrens ran about like mice.   They were said to live among
rocks.  
      OLD WORLD WARBLERS    
    The Sylviidae is a large family of small song-birds,
largely restricted to the Old World.   They have fine
pointed bills for catching insects, and most are drab in
colour, especially in temperate areas.   The only
representatives in New Zealand are the two species of
fernbird, which are closely related to the grassbirds
(  Megalurus  ) of Australia.  
      Chatham Island Fernbird    
    Fernbirds are about the size of House Sparrows.
  They have long tails, the feathers of which have a loose,
tufted, spiky appearance.   In the Chatham Island Fernbird
(  Bowdleria rufescens  ) the throat and breast are
white without conspicuous spots, and the upper parts are
reddish-brown.   In the mainland species (  Bowdleria
punctata  ) the throat and breast are heavily spotted and
the upper parts brownish.  
    In 1868 Charles Traill discovered this species on
Mangere Island in the Chatham group.   He saw a small bird
in the undergrowth and killed it with a stone.   Walter
Buller examined the specimen and described it as new in 1869.
  Fernbirds were also recorded on Pitt Island where burning
and introduced cats may have been factors in their demise.
  Bones have been recorded in subfossil sites, including
kitchen middens, and these establish the former occurrence of
the species on Chatham island itself.   The last museum
specimen was shot on Mangere Island by one of Lord
Rothschild 's collectors.   The species has been extinct
since about 1900.  
    The Chatham Island Fernbird presumably had habits much
like its mainland relative, which inhabits low dense
vegetation at the edges of swamps and tidal inlets.   It
flies weakly and always remains close to cover.   They are
strongly territorial.   The male and female have short
metallic-sounding calls to keep contact in dense cover.  
      HONEYEATERS    
    Honeyeaters (family Meliphagidae) are important and
distinctive birds of the Australasian region.   They eat
insects, fruit and nectar&semi; for feeding on nectar they have
brush-tipped tongues.   The approximately 170 species vary
greatly in size, shape and the ecological niche they occupy.
  There are three species in New Zealand: Tui
(  Prosthemadera novaeseelandiae  ), Stitchbird
(  Notiomystis cincta  ) and Bellbird.  
          Extinct subspecies:     CHATHAM ISLAND
BELLBIRD   Anthornis melanura melanocephala  .    
    The Chatham Island race of the New Zealand Bellbird was
larger than its mainland counterpart and had some minor
differences in plumage.   In the 1870s it was present
throughout the Chatham group, and the song was said to be even
richer than on the mainland.   The last birds were seen on
Little Mangere Island in 1906.  
        NEW ZEALAND WATTLEBIRDS      
    This family of song-birds - the Callaeidae - is unique
to New Zealand.   There are three species: Kokako,
Saddleback (  Philesturnus carunculatus  ) and Huia.
  They may be closely related to the starlings (family
Sturnidae), which the Saddleback and male Huia resemble in
head shape, or they may be related to the Piopio, which is in
the bowerbird family.   They are not related to the
Australian wattlebirds, which are honeyeaters.  
    New Zealand wattlebirds get their name from the pair
of fleshy wattles at the gape, one on each side.   The
wattles are smallest in juveniles and largest in adult males,
so they probably help to communicate the age and breeding
status of individuals.   Their wings are rounded and they do
not fly strongly, but the legs are very powerful with strong
claws, which suit these birds for a largely tree-dwelling
existence in the deep forest.   They use their strong bills
to probe for insects, especially large insects in decaying
wood.   They also take berries, and the Kokako eats
significant amounts of young leaves.  
          Extinct subspecies:     SOUTH ISLAND
KOKAKO   Callaeas cinerea cinerea  .    
    There have been recent reports of this bird from Stewart Island
but they remain unconfirmed.   Otherwise it has not been reliably
recorded for 40 years and may be extinct.   At the time of
European settlement the South Island Kokako occurred widely in
forested areas of the South Island and on Stewart Island.
  The North Island Kokako (  Callaeas cinerea
wilsoni  ) persists in remanent forest of the northern
North Island and has been successfully transferred to Little
Barrier Island.   It has blue wattles and is sometimes
called the Blue-wattled Crow.   The South Island race
(Orange-wattled Crow) has orange wattles.  
      Huia       (Figures 30, 31)  
    The Huia (  Heteralocha acutirostris  ) is about
the size of an Australian Magpie (  Gymnorhina
tibicen  ).   It is the only bird known in which the bill
of the male and   sketch    caption  
  photo    caption  
female are radically different in shape, that of the female
being much longer (up to 104 mm) and therefore more curved
than the male 's (up to about 60 mm).   This suggests that
the sexes were specialised for feeding in very different ways.
  Naturalists who watched Huias feeding recorded that the
male tended to chisel at the outer surfaces of decaying or
live wood, whereas the female was able to probe deeply into
soft wood or crevices to retrieve insects unobtainable to the
male.   Pairs seemed to co-operate in their search for food,
the diet comprising insects, spiders and berries.   Recent
study of the anatomy of the Huia 's head and neck has shown
that the male had a capacity for forceful 'gaping' - inserting
his bill into rotting wood and forcing his beak open to split
the wood.  
      Subfossil bones of the Huia have been found only
in the North Island, at cave and dune sites from North Cape to
the Wellington area.   However, during the period of
European settlement Huias were recorded only in the southern
part of the island - from the Raukumara Range and Turakina
River south to Wellington.   This suggests that the species
declined between the arrival of Polynesians in New Zealand and
the arrival of Europeans.   As well as eating Huias - many
of the dune sites at which Huia bones occur are possibly
kitchen middens - the Maori prized their beaks and tall
feathers for ornamentation.   The first published reference
to the Huia was in the Reverend William Yate 's   Account of
New Zealand   (1835), which was rather late given that many
New Zealand birds were collected on Cook 's voyages.   The
male and female Huias were described and named as separate
species in 1837, an error which became apparent later.
  There have been no reliable sightings of the Huia since a
W.W. Smith saw three on 28 December 1907.  
    The writings of New Zealand naturalists of the late
    ninteenth    nineteenth     century indicate
that the Huia kept to the depths of the forest, moving about
mainly on foot, whether on the ground or in the canopy, and
flying weakly.   The name 'huia' is thought to be an
onomatopoeic rendition of the alarm call, which was a shrill
whistle.   Little is known about the Huia 's breeding.
  The saucer-shaped nest was large, as expected for so large
a bird - about 35 cm across with a smaller depression lined
with fine material for the eggs.   The breeding season was
early summer when most birds breed.   Two to four eggs were
laid, each about 45 mm by 30 mm, and they were greyish with
brown and purplish markings.  
    Towards the end of last century the Huia was one of
New Zealand 's best-known birds internationally, and whereas
today it would have been the subject of widely shown
television wildlife programmes, in those days natural history
museums and private collectors throughout the world sought to
purchase mounted specimens for display.   Collectors with
hunting rifles were probably a significant factor in finishing
off so tame a bird at a time when it was already declining as
a result of habitat clearance and the effect of introduced
predators.  
    Regulations of February 1892 made it illegal to kill
or take Huias in any part of New Zealand, but enforcement was
another matter.   Legend has it that when the Duke of York
(later King George V) visited Rotorua in 1902, a Maori guide
gave him a Huia 's tail feather which he wore in his hatband,
creating an immediate craze which pushed the price of the
feathers to one pound a piece.   Each Huia had 12 tail
feathers, as is typical of most song-birds.   The feathers
were openly traded by jewellers and second-hand dealers as
late as the 1930s.  
    In 1921 G.E. Mason published a report on five ticks
which he found attached to one of the wattles of a Huia
collected near Masterton in 1883.   The ticks belonged to
two species present in India and it has been surmised that
they travelled to New Zealand with Common Mynas
(  Acridotheres tristis  ), which were introduced from
India in 1875.   The ticks may have transmitted a disease to
Huias.      
  

        New Zealand 's record of Mesozoic life - Age
of Reptiles      
    The Mesozoic era consists of three periods and spans
the time between two major episodes of mass extinction,
235 million years ago and 65 million years ago.   It is
commonly known as the age of reptiles, for during this time
large and fierce-looking reptiles such as dinosaurs and sea
dragons dominated life on land and in the sea.  
    Sedimentary rocks that accumulated during the Mesozoic
are common in many parts of New Zealand, and include most of
the hard greywacke rocks of the main ranges in both islands.
  Locally abundant fossils preserve an excellent record of
the marine life which had hard parts and inhabited the seas of
the New Zealand region at this time.   Fossilised remains of
plants and animals that lived on land are much less common,
especially those of Triassic and Jurassic age.  
    The small number of sea animals that survived the mass
extinctions at the end of the Paleozoic soon developed into a
myriad of new forms in the Triassic period.   Most abundant
of those found fossil in our Mesozoic rocks are the bivalves
or clams, followed by lampshells, belemnites, and less common
ammonites, snails, sea eggs, sea lilies, bryozoa, worms and
reptiles.   Rocks rich in marine fossils of Triassic and
Jurassic age are frequently found in a belt on the west side
of the North Island between Port Waikato and Awakino, and also
in northern Southland in a belt between Te Anau and the
Catlins coast.   Rocks rich in Triassic fossils also occur
southeast of Nelson city.  
  photo  
    During the Triassic the New Zealand region was mostly
under the sea, off the south coast of the
super    continent of Gondwana.   Areas that may
have been land, like northwest Nelson, were the most southerly
and coolest parts of the great continent and this may explain
why no fossil remains of dinosaurs or their land-dwelling
ancestors have been found in our Triassic and Jurassic
rocks.   Similarly ammonites lived abundantly in warm
tropical seas, but their sparseness as fossils in New Zealand
rocks is confirmation of our cool climate throughout most of
the Mesozoic.  
    Throughout the late Paleozoic and Mesozoic the New
Zealand region lay along the collision boundary between two
great crustal plates of the earth - the Gondwanan and Pacific.
  Initially, during the Permian, Triassic and early
Jurassic, a vast thickness of sediments (tens of
kilometres thick) accumulated on the subsiding floor of the
sea in our area and a chain of volcanoes or volcanic islands
erupted intermittently nearby.   These sediments were
carried by earth movement (subduction) deep into the
earth, where they were hardened into greywacke or
metamorphosed into schist.  
    About 150 million years ago, towards the end of the
Jurassic period, the downward movement of the Pacific plate
became jammed beneath the leading edge of the Gondwanan plate.
  The collision between the two plates was translated into a
buckling upwards along the boundary and much of the sea floor
and underlying rocks were pushed up to form land in the New
Zealand region.   By the Cretaceous period a huge land,
about half the size of modern Australia, had been formed.
  It extended from New Caledonia through New Zealand to the
Chatham and Campbell Islands.   Many Gondwanan animals and
plants moved into the New Zealand region at this time.
  Examples include the ancestors of the tuatara, our endemic
frogs, moas, kiwis, our large snails and giant wetas.  
    Thus during the early Cretaceous almost all of New
Zealand was land.   Marine rocks and fossils of this age are
virtually absent.   By the middle Cretaceous, some 90
million years ago, Gondwana was beginning to break apart and
rifts began opening up between Australia and New Zealand.
  During the latter part of the Cretaceous and into the
early Tertiary (between 80 and 55 million years ago), New
Zealand split away from Gondwana forming the Tasman Sea we
know today and some of the southern ocean between us and
Antarctica.   Ancestral marsupials, land mammals and snakes
evolved in Gondwana, in the late Cretaceous
  photos    captions   and early Tertiary, just too
late to reach New Zealand before we moved away.  
    As New Zealand split away, parts of the region began
to subside.   In the area between East Cape and Wairarapa
and south to Marlborough, sediment accumulated on the
floor of the encroaching sea preserving abundant fossil
bivalves, belemnites, lampshells and snails, together with
occasional mosasaurs, plesiosaurs and rare dinosaurs,
washed in from the adjacent land.   The land was being
worn down by erosion.   Thick beds of coal, river silt and
gravels accumulated, in large swamps and alluvial plains, in
south Otago, Westland, northwest Nelson and offshore Taranaki.
  Many of these late Cretaceous rocks now exposed at the
surface contain beds rich in fossil leaves, wood and
occasional freshwater mussels.  
    Suddenly at the of the Cretaceous, 65 million years
ago, the largest known world-wide extinction event took place.
  It killed off all the dinosaurs, flying reptiles and sea
dragons.   All the ammonites and belemnites too became
extinct.   It greatly reduced the number and variety of
almost all groups of animals and plants, whether they lived on
land or in the sea.   Indeed three-quarters of all living
creatures are believed to have died out.   There have been
many postulated explanations over the years but the most
likely cause was the collision of an asteroid (10-15km across)
with the earth.   This would have created thick dust clouds
that encircled the globe, shutting out sunlight and
thereby killing off many plants on land and in the sea.
  Animals that relied on these plants for food would have
died from starvation, as would the predators that lived on
them.   Evidence of this major extinction at the end of
the Mesozoic can be studied in the fossils preserved in rock
sequences in Marlborough and the Wairarapa.  
  captions  
  photos  
        Fossil clams - bivalves      
    Bivalves are a large group within the phylum
Mollusca.   All possess two valves (shells) hinged
together at the top and enclosing the soft parts.   This
group includes such well known delicacies as scallop, oyster,
mussel, toheroa, cockle and clam.   In addition to their two
valves they also differ from other molluscs, such as snails,
squid and chitons, by the lack of a head and the possession of
a compressed, fleshy tongue-like foot that projects through
the gape of the shells when it is feeding or moving.  
    All bivalves live in the sea except for freshwater
mussels.   Most are found on the sea floor as sluggish
crawlers, burrowers in soft sediment, borers in rock or fixed
by holdfasts or cement to solid objects.   A few, such as
scallops, are capable of swimming short distances.  
    The hard bivalve shells are readily preserved and
fossilised.   The oldest bivalves are found in middle
Cambrian rocks (eg. Trilobite Rock) and they gradually
evolved into a diversity of forms throughout the Paleozoic.
  By the Triassic, they had increased in abundance in
the New Zealand region to succeed the lampshells as the
dominant group of invertebrates living on the sea floor.
  Indeed throughout the Mesozoic, bivalves are the most
abundant and important group of fossils in New Zealand.
  The evolving succession of bivalves are used as the basis
for dividing up the Mesozoic era in New Zealand into 22
different time zones.  
    In New Zealand 's Tertiary sedimentary rocks, bivalves
remain abundant and jointly dominate the bigger fossils with
their cousins, the sea snails (gastropods).   Some
fossil bivalves are also important in determining the age of
Tertiary rocks in New Zealand, especially the rapidly evolving
scallops and fanshells (pectinids) of the late
Tertiary.  
  photos  
  captions  
  illustrations  
  captions  
  photo  
  caption  
        Dinosaurs      
    Dinosaurs are children 's favourite group of extinct
animals and fossils.   They evolved in the late Triassic,
about 200 million years ago, and ruled the land during the
Jurassic and Cretaceous, until their dramatic die out 65
million years ago at the end of the Mesozoic.   Some
dinosaurs were vegetarians and grew to huge sizes, whereas
others were ferocious predators.   Most lived in the
Northern Hemisphere with few reaching southern lands.  
    Until the 1980s dinosaur and pterosaur (flying
reptile) fossils were not known from New Zealand.   In
recent years a dedicated amateur paleontologist, Joan Wiffen,
and her friends have made numerous exciting fossil discoveries
in the late Cretaceous rocks of inland Hawkes Bay.   These
include mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, turtles, and single bones of a
pterosaur and two dinosaurs - a carnivorous theropod and a 5m
long herbivorous hypsilophodont.  
  caption    photo  
        Sea dragons - ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs and
mosasaurs      
    Mesozoic seas were dominated by large swimming
reptiles or sea dragons.   The oldest group were the fish
lizards or ichthyosaurs that flourished in the Triassic and
Jurassic periods.   They resembled large dolphins with
numerous big teeth in their long jaws.   Fossilised
ichthyosaur bones have been found in Triassic rocks in inland
Canterbury and the Hokonui Hills of northern
Southland.  
    In the Cretaceous, ichthyosaurs were displaced in
their dominance of the seas by mosasaurs (sea lizards) and
plesiosaurs (sea serpents).   Mosasaurs were up to 15m long
and resembled modern monitor lizards.   They were probably
the most ferocious predators of Mesozoic seas.   Plesiosaurs
were of similar length to mosasaurs but had much broader
bodies, long powerful paddle-like flippers and often a
long neck.   The legendary Loch Ness monster is "modelled"
on a plesiosaur.   Fossil bones and some spectacular
complete skeletons of both plesiosaurs and mosasaurs have been
excavated from late Cretaceous rocks in Hawkes Bay,
Marlborough, North Canterbury and North Otago.  
    Like the dinosaurs, these giant sea dragons also died
out at the end of the Mesozoic.  
  photo  
  illustration  
  captions  
      photos  
  captions    
        Ammonites and belemnites - shell-bearing
squid      
    Ammonites and belemnites are two well known groups of
extinct marine animals that are commonly found fossilised in
New Zealand 's Mesozoic rocks.   Both belong to the group of
Mollusca called Cephalopoda, which includes modern octopus,
squid and cuttlefish.   All cephalopods have a ring of
tentacles or arms around the mouth and a funnel through which
water can be squirted to help propel them through the
water.  
    The oldest groups of fossil cephalopods (the
nautiloids and ammonoids) had external, chambered shells
with a large final chamber into which the animal could
withdraw all its soft parts and tentacles.   The nautiloids
(which have lived from the Cambrian to the present day) differ
from the ammonoids (Silurian to Cretaceous) in the shape of
the wall (septa) between chambers.   In nautiloids the wall
is a simple curve but in ammonoids it becomes folded and
frilled towards the margin and this difference is readily seen
in fossils.   Nautiloids had their greatest variety of forms
in the Ordovician and have been in decline ever since.
  They are now near extinction, being represented only by
the modern pearly Nautilus.   The first nautiloids had
small, conical shells but as time passed these evolved into
the flat, planispiral shells of all Mesozoic, Tertiary and
modern forms.   Occasional fossil nautiloids are found in
New Zealand 's Paleozoic and Tertiary rocks.  
    Ammonoids appeared in the Silurian and had four great
bursts of evolution (Devonian, Carboniferous-Permian,
Triassic, Jurassic-Cretaceous) when many forms developed.
  Each burst was followed by a major die out with the loss
of a large part of the Ammonoid fauna.   Most ammonoids have
tightly-coiled shells but short-lived straight or
partly-coiled forms evolved on several occasions.   During
the Paleozoic, and into the Mesozoic, forms gradually evolved
with more and more complexly-folded and frilled chamber walls.
  Those with the most intricately folded walls are the
ammonites of Triassic to Cretaceous age.  
    Ammonites frequently form the nucleus inside
concretions in the rocks.   Scattered, usually
poorly-preserved, Permian ammonoid fossils occur in
Marlborough and Southland.   Much better preserved Mesozoic
ammonites have frequently been found around the Kaipara
Harbour, Port Waikato, Kawhia Harbour, Wairarapa, Hokonui
Hills and Catlins coast of northern Southland.  
    Belemnites are the ancestors of modern squid and
cuttlefish and are distinguished from them by the presence
of a hard, bullet-shaped, internal skeleton of calcite, called
the guard, located inside the tail.   Belemnites
appeared in the late Paleozoic, but they are most abundant,
overseas and in New Zealand rocks, in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous.   They became extinct by the early Tertiary.
  When the belemnite squid died, it sank to the sea floor,
the flesh decayed and only the hard guard survived to be
fossilised.   They are common fossils in the Port Waikato,
Kawhia, Wairarapa, Haumuri Bluff (Kaikoura coast) and
Hokonui Hills areas.  
    Nautiloids, ammonoids and belemnites were mostly
free-swimming animals that easily spread throughout the
world 's seas.   They also evolved rapidly into many
different, short-lived forms (especially the ammonites).
  Thus they are particularly useful in accurately
recognising rocks of the same age world-wide.  
  photos  
  captions  
          Mesozoic plants      
    The ferns which were so abundant on the New Zealand
margin of Gondwana in the late Paleozoic were followed in the
Mesozoic by common conifers, palms and later flowering plants.
  The main canopy trees in the Triassic and Jurassic forests
were conifers and broadleaved ginkgos.   Seed ferns, cycad
palms, tree ferns, horsetails and lycopods comprised much of
the understorey shrub layer.   Judging by their abundant
spores, mosses and liverworts were more common in the Mesozoic
than they are today.  
    Major changes occurred in New Zealand 's vegetation
and worldwide in the Cretaceous with the appearance of the
first flowering plants (Angiosperms).   They evolved
rapidly into many varieties and had become the dominant plant
group by the late Cretaceous and have remained so ever since.
  By the end of the Cretaceous the ancestors of many modern
plants had appeared.   By this time the southern beeches
(  Nothofagus  ) and proteas had become common and
diverse in New Zealand.   Nevertheless two different groups
of conifers, the podocarps and araucarians, remained
common.  
    Throughout most of the Mesozoic, New Zealand 's flora
shared a lot in common with other Southern Hemisphere
countries that were then all still part of Gondwana.
  Towards the end of the Cretaceous, New Zealand 's plants
began to evolve independently of other countries, as we split
away from the supercontinent.  
    Our knowledge of New Zealand 's Mesozoic plants comes
mostly from study of their abundant fossil spores and pollen.
  Wood, leaves and seeds are less common but provide more
graphic evidence of our ancient vegetation.   Triassic plant
macrofossils are mostly poorly preserved leaves and wood
fragments.   The best of these are found in rocks at Mt
Potts and Benmore Dam (both South Canterbury).  
    Better preserved plant macrofossils come from New
Zealand 's Jurassic rocks, especially from Port Waikato (South
Auckland), Curio Bay (Southland) and the Clent Hills
(Canterbury).   Common Cretaceous plant fossils can readily
be found at places such as Pakawau (northwest Nelson),
Paparoa Ranges (Westland), Malvern Hills (Canterbury), Shag
Point (North Otago) and Ohai (Southland).   Peat swamps were
common features of the low-lying landscape of the late
Cretaceous.      
  

      Meat-eating Dinosaurs: The Theropods    
    The land reptiles that are known as the  'dinosaurs' can
be grouped into two large orders: Order Saurischia and Order
Ornithischia.   Both groups were derived from ancestral
reptiles (the thecodonts) during late Permian and Triassic
times (260-205 million years ago), and they soon became the
dominant reptiles of the Mesozoic era, particularly in the
Northern Hemisphere.   Ornithischia have bird-like hip bones
(see following section), whereas saurischian ('lizard-hipped')
dinosaurs have typical reptilian hip bones.   Saurischian
hips are characterised by a three-pronged pattern of pelvic
bones, which provided support areas for large leg-moving
muscles, enabling them to walk and run efficiently.
  Saurischians can be separated into meat-eating
(carnivorous) and plant-eating (herbivorous) forms, but it is
the carnivorous forms belonging to the Suborder Theropoda that
are the best known.  
    The theropods ('beast-feet') included reptiles that
were the great carnivores of the Mesozoic.   They first
appeared in mid-Triassic times, 240-230 million years ago, and
quickly developed into a highly diverse group of predators that
fed on many different things.   Some forms were quite small,
slender and lightly built (the coelurosaurians) but others
reached very large sizes (the carnosaurs or 'flesh-lizards'),
culminating in the most formidable theropod of all,
  Tyrannosaurus  , attaining a body length of 16 m and
having a skull 1.5 m long.  
    Theropods were very active and highly mobile hunters.
  They had powerful back legs and the proportions of their
individual leg bones (short femur and long tibia) were such
that they had a long running stride.   The hind feet had
three functional toes, armed with long claws.   Their
forelimbs were very small and had three clawed toes.   They
were presumably used for grasping food while it was being
eaten.   The theropods had large heads with strong powerful
jaws and a wide gape, and sabre-like teeth were socketed into
the jaw margins.   Being entirely flesh eaters, their main
food was the various plant-eating dinosaurs of their times.
  They had strong muscular tails that served as a prop to the
body when they were standing upright, but when they were
running it was probably carried stretched out in a horizontal
position, to maintain balance.   Because the theropods
reigned supreme on land at the time, and consequently had
little fear of attack, only the larger types had armoured skin,
and then only on their upper surfaces.  
    Theropods lived on most continents of the world, and
reached their climax during Cretaceous times, 135-65 million
years ago.   Like most Mesozoic reptiles, they died out at
the end of the Cretaceous, at the time of world  -  wide
extinctions.  
    In New Zealand the evidence for the presence of
carnivorous theropods is very slender and rests on the
discovery of a single, but nonetheless very distinctive, caudal
vertebra described in 1981.   This vertebra (back bone) is
thought to have come from an animal about 4 m in length and
weighing about 400 kg.   The specimen was found in rocks of
late Cretaceous age in inland Hawkes Bay which had been
deposited on the sea floor between 87 and 65 million years ago.
  In addition, two further specimens have been found in rocks
of the same age in the same area: a very large toe bone and a
small toe bone, having both bird-like and theropod-like
characters.   Together, the two toe bones provide further
evidence for the presence of theropods.  
  The illustration opposite depicts a scene in the coastal
forest of inland Hawkes Bay, in late Cretaceous times, with a
meat-eating theropod dinosaur feeding off the carcass of a
plant-eating ornithopod dinosaur.  
  illustration  
      Plant-eating Dinosaurs: The
Ornithopods    
    The ornithischians represent the other great
subdivision of dinosaurs that were dominant in the Mesozoic
era.   They were all entirely plant-eating (herbivorous)
reptiles and some were bipedal (walking on two legs), whilst
others were     quadripedal    quadrupedal    
(walking on four legs).   Anatomically they were
distinguished from the saurischians (see preceding section) by
the unusual arrangement of their hip bones, which resembled
those of birds.   Hence they are often called 'bird-hipped'
dinosaurs.   They also had a specialised predentary bone on
the lower jaw as an adaption for browsing on tough and spikey
vegetation, and an arrangement of long bony tendons along the
backbone.  
    The bird-like hip of the ornithischians had a
four-branched pelvic structure in which the forked pubic bone
was reversed and lay parallel to the ischium (as it does in
living birds), and partly supported the stomach.   This
pelvic arrangement provided a strong base for muscle attachment
in the more bipedal forms, especially for the tail, and for
support (at the centre of gravity beneath the hip) of the large
stomach and digestive system that had to cope with the tough,
fibrous cellulose and resin-rich vegetation of the Mesozoic
era.  
    The ornithopods (or 'bird-feet') were a group of mostly
small-sized ornithischians, most of which were bipedal.
  Although they superficially resembled many of the bipedal
carnivorous theropods, they were not as erect as them and had
more of a perching stance on the ground, and perhaps browsed by
means of moving about on all fours.   Nonetheless, they were
reasonably mobile dinosaurs and their long hind legs gave them
speed and agility which was often their only defence against
predatory theropods, as their bodies were not armoured.   The
head structures of the ornithopods were adapted for browsing
and for the cropping of vegetation.   Simple teeth at the
front of the upper jaw bit against a sharp, toothless,
crescent-shaped horny 'beak' at the tip of the lower jaw,
resembling the beak of turtles.   Fluted and expanded teeth
were positioned at the rear of the jaws for shearing and
chewing of vegetation.   In contrast to the carnivorous
dinosaurs, the articulation of the jaw was not at the back of
the skull but rather some distance forward.   Thus whilst the
mouth opening was not as wide as in carnivores, the chewing of
tough vegetation using a circular grinding motion was more
easily accomplished.   Ornithopods possessed strong cheek
muscles and some forms may also have had cheek pouches in which
to retain food balls.   The front legs were half the length
of the hind legs and most possessed a 5-fingered, clawed
'hand', with the 5th finger being small and at right angles to
the wrist.   These hands were capable of grasping vegetation
during browsing.   The hind foot had 4 functional clawed toes
with a 5th being reduced to a small size.  
    The New Zealand record of an ornithopod dinosaur
consists of a single fragment of an ilium (one of the pelvic
bones), collected from rocks of late Cretaceous age in inland
Hawkes Bay laid down in shallow seas between 87 and 65 million
years ago.   From such a fragment it is not easy to say what
form of ornithopod it represents, but generalised size
comparisons can be made with smaller forms like the
hypsilophodontids (1.5 - 2 m in length).   These were very
successful early Cretaceous ornithopods that lived in Europe,
North America and Australia.   It is thought that the New
Zealand fossil represents a small bipedal ornithopod dinosaur,
with a light skeleton and an overall length of about 2 m, and
bears a close similarity to members of the hypsilophodontid
genus   Dryosaurus  .  
    The illustration opposite shows small plant-eating
ornithopod dinosaurs browsing on the cycad-like vegetation of
the late Cretaceous coastal forests of Hawkes Bay.  
  illustration  
      Pterosaurs: Wing-Lizards    
    Pterosaurs were the great flying reptiles of the
Mesozoic era, and the first specialised flying vertebrates to
appear on earth.   They were probably warm-blooded and had a
history of development parallel to that of the birds and bats
that appeared later in geological time.   Pterosaurs probably
occupied many of the ecological niches that birds now fill.
  Because nearly all the remains of pterosaurs have been
found in marine deposits preserved on most of the continents of
the world (Europe, North and South America, Africa, Asia and
Australia), it is concluded that they were probably reasonably
common inhabitants of the coastline, using their large wing
membranes for soaring flight, and riding the offshore wind
currents, rather like the modern sea birds, particularly the
wandering albatross.   In their feeding habits they were
probably like pelicans, patrolling the coastal waters searching
for fish, which they scooped up from the surface of the
sea.  
    Pterosaurs had a long skull and slender 'beak', either
smooth-edged or armed with spiky teeth and probably with a fish
pouch beneath the lower jaw (rather like a pelican or a
cormorant).   The eyes were large, and the nostrils were set
well back on the beak.   The neck was short and flexible, and
the trunk short and compact to support the long wings.   The
tail was either short or long and stiff.   The skeleton was
light and delicate, but strong, with hollow air-filled
(pneumatic) bones (like those of birds) and a large breast bone
(sternum) on the ventral surface of the chest.   The
forelimbs were stout, with the upper arm and forearm attached
to a powerful shoulder girdle.   The fingers were modified to
support the long, narrow wing membrane&semi; the first 3 fingers
formed small curved claws, while the 4th was greatly elongated
in 4 jointed sections to support the wing membrane.
  Although the wing structure was only partly supported, it
is believed that the wing as a whole was capable of a flapping
motion, although soaring and gliding was probably the main mode
of flight.   Although bipedal, the hind limbs were splayed,
which would have given them an awkward gait when grounded, so
it is likely that they relied a lot on their wing claws for
climbing and mobility in general.   Like bats, pterosaurs
probably hung upside down when sleeping.   The body surfaces
of pterosaurs were covered with a fine hair, the presence of
which is used as evidence to support the probability that they
were warm-blooded.  
    The earliest remains of pterosaurs have been found in
Italy, in rocks of late Triassic age, 220-205 million years
old.   During Jurassic times, 205-135 million years ago,
pterosaurs became widespread in Europe and Africa and
short-tailed pterodactyl forms developed.   Pterosaur
development reached its peak in Cretaceous time, 135-65 million
years ago.   Large forms appeared, some the size of a light
aircraft.     Quetzalcoatlus   from Texas had an
estimated wing span of 15 metres.   These large forms,
grouped together as the '  Pteranodon   type', developed
a bony crest on the rear of the skull to act as a
counterbalance.   Like most reptiles of the Mesozoic, they
became extinct at the end of the Cretaceous time.  
    New Zealand 's first record of a pterosaur was described
in 1988, and is based on the end piece of a left fore-limb bone
(ulna) and a single tooth, obtained from late Cretaceous rocks
of inland Hawkes Bay laid down between 87 and 65 million years
ago.   Comparisons of this bone and tooth suggest that this
specimen had a wingspan of about 3.75 m and its relationships
may lie with the 'crestless' toothed pterosaurs from the
Cretaceous of South America.  
    The New Zealand record is the most southern (and is at
the highest Cretaceous latitude) of the three records of late
Cretaceous pterosaurs known from the Southern Hemisphere.  
    The scene opposite depicts two pterosaurs swooping down
from their cliff-top perches to feed from a shoal of fish off
the east coast of the North Island during late Cretaceous
times.  
  illustration  
      A Giant Cretaceous Fish:
Pachyrhizodus    
    The genus   Pachyrhizodus   is a distinctive and
large (1.5 m) surface-swimming predatory fish that was
widespread throughout the Cretaceous seas of the world, 135-65
million years ago.   Fossilised skeletal remains have been
recorded from rocks in England, Europe, North America, North
Africa, Australia and New Zealand.  
      Pachyrhizodus   belongs in one of several
families of fish that developed in the Cretaceous as an
offshoot from the main line of fish evolution and while it
shows some advanced characters (compared with those of the
smaller fish of the preceding Jurassic period), many relatively
primitive features are still present.  
      Pachyrhizodus   is notable for its bulky and
heavy body with large stout pectoral fins and an extremely
large sickle-shaped tail.   All these features point to a
powerful swimmer.   Each pectoral fin has a large stout spine
while the dorsal fin, pelvic fins and anal fin are fringed with
small spines.   The scales of   Pachyrhizodus   have a
very distinctive ornament, with a knobbly surface, and have a
triangular tip with a pattern of ridges.   There is also a
prominent scale bone above the gill cover plate (operculum),
and an enlarged scale is present in front of each of the paired
pectoral fins.   The jaw is rectangular in shape and rounded
in front.   There is a single row of large incurved conical
socketed teeth, which have expanded bases similar to those of
marine mosasaur reptiles.   There is a double row of teeth
inside the jaw edge.   The back bones (vertebrae) of
  Pachyrhizodus   are most distinctive, and are large and
straight-sided and in cross-section show a nearly solid bony
centre surrounded by two distinct bony rings and an outer layer
of spongy bone.  
      A fairly complete but disarticulated skeleton of
the largest species in the genus was found in New Zealand in
1983.   This specimen was collected from rocks of late
Cretaceous age (87-65 million years old) in inland Hawkes Bay.
  Jaw bones and teeth, vertebrae, fins and other internal
bones are preserved.  
    The rarity of this fish as a fossil in New Zealand -
only this one specimen has been found to date - may well be a
reflection of its preferred deep-water environment, which is
not well represented by exposed Cretaceous sediments in New
Zealand.  
    The illustration opposite is a reconstruction of
  Pachyrhizodus caninus  , the large carnivorous fish
with reptilian jaws, that lived in the seas covering the east
coast of the North Island during late Cretaceous
times.      
  

      Coromandel stag beetle  
"  Dorcus  " sp.  
    Stag beetles are among the world 's largest beetles,
and they occur almost worldwide.   They are called stag
beetles because of the grotesque development of their
mandibles (jaws) which, in some species, resemble the shape of
deer antlers.   The enlarged mandibles, which are supported
by an equally large head, are found only in the males.  
    Stag beetles are closely related to scarab beetles,
whose males are also often adorned with large horn- and
tusk-like structures.   However, those of scarab beetles are
immobile parts of the head and body, whereas the structures of
stag beetles are independently movable mandibles.   The
mandibles are not used for biting or chewing food as with
other beetles, as the stag beetle feeds on moisture and sap
using a brush-shaped group of bristles.   Fanciful stories
abound as to the use and purpose of these mandibles but few
observations have been made of any of the stag beetles.
  They are occasionally seen fighting, and some specimens
carry spike marks on their bodies.  
    There are at least seven species of "  Dorcus  "
in New Zealand, all adapted to burrowing by having a flattish
body, digging legs, and grooves along either side of the head
to fit and protect the right-angled antennae.   The eyes are
almost divided and the beetles can probably see equally well
above and below, detecting movement from almost any direction.
  New Zealand stag beetles have some unique features and are
flightless, with only vestiges of membranous wings.  
    The Coromandel stag beetle is a rare and as-yet
undescribed species.   In general appearance it is similar
to "  Dorcus  "   auriculatus  , a protected
species found in the northern Bay of Plenty, and until
recently it was thought to be that species.   The only other
protected stag beetle is "  Dorcus  "
  ithaginis  , a species about 22 millimetres long.
  It is restricted to the Mokohinau Islands, where it has
been described as burrowing through the peat-like layer formed
by horokaka, the succulent plant   Disphyma
australe  .  
  photo  
        Helms'   stag beetle  
"  Dorcus  "   helmsi    
      Helms'   stag beetle is New Zealand 's largest
and most imposing stag beetle.   The combined length of its
body and jaws can reach 42 millimetres, and it can be 20
millimetres wide, but today it reaches this size only on
rat-free islands.   The mainland forms are considerably
smaller, seldom reaching even 30 millimetres, and the huge
jaws are proportionately reduced.   Females lack the large
mandibles of the male, but are readily distinguished from
other beetles by their elbowed antennae, a feature typical of
most stag beetles.   Although recorded along the western
length of the South Island,   Helms'   stag beetles are
more often found in the high-rainfall forests of South
Westland and Fiordland, where they are occasionally seen
during the day around the bases of large kahikatea or feeding
on sap exuding from tree trunks.   This behaviour exposes
the beetles to rats and may explain why they are more frequent
in wetter forests that are least suitable for ship rats.
  Eggs are laid in crevices of wet and decaying wood, and
the hatching larvae, which resemble the C-shaped grass-grub
beetle, feed on the wood of rotting logs, stumps, and roots.
  Once fully grown, the larvae pupate within cells made from
wood particles and earth.   Development from egg to beetle
takes several years, and adult beetles live beyond 2 years.
  On islands in Fiordland, all stages of the life cycle have
been observed in the rotting stumps and roots of
  Dracophyllum  .  
    When faced with both new predators and habitats
modified by humans or mammals, it would appear that the loss
of flight, coupled with other factors such as large body size,
has brought about the demise of many New Zealand
"  Dorcus  " stag beetles.   In contrast,   Lucanus
cervus  , the huge, night-flying, 75-millimetre-long stag
beetle of central Europe, is locally spread over the southern
half of England and is not uncommon in the London suburbs!  
  photo  
      Marlborough ground beetle  
  Megadromus   sp.  
    Ground beetles, often known as carabids, have a
worldwide distribution and are one of the most common
beetles.  
    New Zealand ground beetles are usually black, although
some have a metallic red or green sheen.   The large species
have no wings and their hardened wingcases are fused.  
    As with most ground beetles, the Marlborough ground
beetle is found during the day under stones and logs,
especially in moist forest.   They are carnivorous and hunt
at night for their prey of soft-bodied grubs, caterpillars,
snails, and slugs.   They are sometimes seen out during
heavily overcast days in summer, when kingfishers sometimes
catch and feed them to their nestlings.   The Marlborough
ground beetle is heavily preyed on by rodents, hedgehogs,
stoats, and wild pigs.   Some ground beetles overseas, such
as the bombardier beetles of Europe, defend themselves by
ejecting a volatile substance which explodes on contact with
the air, burning the attacker with nitrous acid.
  Unfortunately, New Zealand 's ground beetles have not
developed a defence against mammals.   They attempt to
defend themselves by ejecting foul-smelling secretions from
the anal gland.   But these chemical compounds are primarily
for defence against infection by bacteria and fungi, and
protect the beetle only by making the immediate environment
more acidic.  
    Late in summer the female ground beetle, like other
  Megadromus   species, lays her eggs in a cell in the
ground and stays with them until they are large enough to
catch their own prey.   The larvae overwinter and pupate in
earthen cells.   They have a life cycle of 2-3 years.  
    Some ground beetles, such as   Maoripamborus  
with its slender head and thorax, are modified to feed
exclusively on snails, and possibly the Marlborough ground
beetle does also.   This could be one reason it is so
scarce, since the few places in Marlborough where this beetle
is found were once the home of thriving numbers of
  Powelliphanta   snails (see p. 74).   The largest
ground beetle,   Mecodema punctellum  , is endemic to
Stephens Island, and is considered to be extinct.   It may
have been forced to extinction with the loss of large land
snails when the forest on the island was cleared.  
  photo  
      Cook Strait amychus     Amychus
granulatus     
      Chatham Island amychus     Amychus
candezi    
      Amychus   beetles belong to the same family as
click beetles and skipjacks (which are better known as
wireworms - the larval stage of click beetles).   A few
click beetles are infamous pests of pasture and garden because
they eat roots and crops.   Others feed only on dead wood,
and many of the native species are predators and even
cannibals.   One group of tropical fireflies are click
beetles.  
    Click beetles are so named because of their ability to
right themselves by click-snapping their body segments and
leaping vertically up to 200 millimetres.   This device may
also act as a means of escape.  
      Amychus   beetles have lost the ability to
"click" but like so many endemic New Zealand insects they have
retained many primitive characteristics.   They have long
lost the ability to fly, and grow larger than is usual in most
temperate climates.   The bark-like beetles are usually
found from September to April in crevices in rocks and under
logs and stones.   The larvae are thought to feed on the
roots of forest trees and shrubs, and take several years to
develop before pupating in the soil.   The adults browse
algae and lichens on tree trunks at night.  
      Amychus   beetles are isolated on widely
separated island groups and have never been found on the
mainland.   Their distribution on the Three Kings Islands
and Chatham Islands is an indication that they are ancient
relicts, but their distribution on a few Cook Strait islands
is difficult to explain.  
    Many rare and endangered species are now restricted to
islands, and the main causes of their decline are destruction
of the forests and predation by introduced animals such as
rats.  
    Despite the removal of much of the forest last century
on Stephens Island and The Brothers in Cook Strait,
  Amychus   beetles were reported as "abundant" 50 years
ago.   Today they are regarded as rare on both islands,
although there has been little apparent change in the
vegetation since then.   A recent increase in the number of
tuataras present may account for the large decline in the
number of beetles.  
  photo  
      Cromwell chafer beetle  
  Prodontria lewisi    
    This beetle was first collected in about 1900 at
Cromwell, and it is restricted to that area.   Belonging to
the family Scarabaeidae, the Cromwell chafer is related to the
common grass-grub beetle, and more distantly to the sand
scarab, and the sacred scarabs of Egypt.   However, unlike
most of their relatives, the New Zealand species of
  Prodontria   are all flightless, and they are found
from Otago Lakes and Central Otago to the southern tip of
Stewart Island.  
    The Cromwell chafer beetle lives only in scarcely
modified stretches of shallow loamy sand in the Clutha-Kawarau
junction.   The adult beetles emerge at night from August to
January, and are frequently most numerous in October.
  During this time they feed on scabweed, sorrell, and
various other weeds.   Before daybreak they bury themselves
at the bases of silver tussock (  Poa laevis  ) to half
a metre deep.   The larvae feed on the roots of silver
tussock and have a life cycle of more than a year.   The
habitat of the Cromwell chafer has been reduced to about 100
hectares by the activities and construction of
  photo   
a hydro-dam and township.   As well as this destruction of
sand-dune habitat, overgrazing by rabbits has destroyed much
of the important tussock-scabweed associations.
  Ironically, the chafer 's most serious predator, the little
owl, was introduced from Europe during 1906-10 to control
orchard birds.   Examination of little owl castings has
shown that Cromwell chafer beetles make up about 10 percent of
their summer diet.   Other likely predators, all introduced,
are hedgehogs, blackbirds, and thrushes.  
    A reserve of 81 hectares was established for the
Cromwell chafer during 1982-83.   Extensive areas nearby and
in adjacent valleys have been surveyed, but no further
populations of the beetle have been found.  
    Two related species are found in nearby Alexandra.
    Prodontria modesta   lives in sandy loam but not
in sand.     P. bicolorata  , the Alexandra chafer, is
also threatened because of land development for horticulture
and housing.  
  photo  
      Flax weevil     Anagotus
fairburni    
    Of all the large flightless weevils in New Zealand the
flax weevil is probably the best known, even though it was not
discovered until 1931, at the northern end of D'Urville
Island.   Once widespread throughout New Zealand, it is now
mainly confined to rat-free islands, from the Poor Knights,
Hen and Chickens group in the north to Fiordland in the south.
  Although usually considered a coastal species, it has
recently been found in the Tararua Range living on mountain
flax (  Phormium cookianum  )&semi; other remnant populations
probably survive above the bushline in other mountain
ranges.  
    The flax weevil 's life history is tied to the flax
plant (  Phormium   species).   The adults hide
amongst the dead leaves and debris at the bases of the plants
during the day and come out to feed soon after dusk.   They
feed on the youngest leaves, chewing characteristic notches in
them.   When out feeding they will immediately "freeze" in
the light of a torch.   If the leaves are touched, the
weevils instantly drop into the litter, where they lie
motionless in the dead, brown bases of the flax bushes and are
extremely difficult to see.  
    Females lay eggs at night in rows along the lower
edges of the leaves near the centre of the "fans" of flax
leaves.   Each female lays six to eight 2-millimetre-long
white eggs each night for several weeks during summer.   The
eggs gradually become almost black, and take 3-5 weeks to
hatch.  
    The newly emerged larvae are 3 millimetres long,
yellowish, and covered with long hairs.   They burrow into
the fleshy bases of the flax stems, where they feed on the
soft tissues.   When these larvae are fully grown, at about
20 millimetres long, they pupate among the rotting fibrous
material at the bases of the flax plants.   The pupal
cocoons are about 35 millimetres long and 20 millimetres wide
and are formed from a mixture of plant fibre and soft black
rotted matter.  
    In captivity, adult flax weevils will live for over 12
months, but how long a weevil spends as a larva or pupa is not
known.  
  photo  
        Stephens Island weevil     Anagotus
stephenensis    
      Turbott 's weevil     Anagotus
turbotti    
    New Zealand 's largest and most striking weevils belong
to the genus   Anagotus  , a group of both large and
small flightless weevils with differing habits and habitat
requirements.  
    Stephens Island and Turbott 's weevils, two of the
largest and most colourful, are the only lowland survivors of
a once diverse and widespread group.   Fragments of giant
weevil species similar in size and form to these have been
discovered in cave deposits at Waitomo, dating back some 1700
years, and others have been found in the Pureora Buried Forest
deposits formed during the Taupo eruption of about A.D. 130.
  None of the giant-sized   Anagotus   found in
prehuman subfossil cave and forest deposits have been found in
the more recent upper deposits.   They are likely to have
become extinct through being eaten by kiore, the Polynesian
rat, that arrived with humans some 800-900 years ago.  
    Turbott 's weevil is found only on the rat-free islands
of the Three Kings and Poor Knights, and on Muriwhenua of the
Hen and Chickens Islands&semi; the Stephens Island weevil has been
found only on Stephens Island.   These weevils, whose larvae
are wood borers, are found in the live wood of several
different trees, but they are especially fond of ngaio and
karaka.   The adults can be found day and night on the
branches of trees and have been observed eating the somewhat
oily leaves of ngaio.  
    Several other species of   Anagotus   are
generally distributed in New Zealand, and are not considered
to be endangered nor prone to rat predation.   These are
usually smaller species living in snow grasses and niggerhead
sedges, or in   Coprosma   or   Phyllocladus  ,
with one, quite abundant, in fallen logs.  
  photo  
      Speargrass weevil     Lyperobius
huttoni    
    The speargrass weevils are the most widely distributed
of the large flightless weevils and unlike most other species
they are chiefly found on the mainland, rather than on
rat-free offshore islands.   However, apart from a small
population on the Wellington coastline they are restricted to
the South Island in "islands of the upper atmosphere" -
remnant tussock grassland about 1200-1600 metres high on
mountain ranges carved out by early glaciations.  
    The speargrass weevil was so named because climbers
usually found it feeding on the stiff and spiked spear-shaped
leaves of   Aciphylla   (speargrass or spaniard).   It
is also found on the smaller, softer species of
  Aciphylla  , and on related   Anisotome  
plants, including the prostrate cushion form of   Anisotome
imbricata  .   Adult weevils are active during the day.
  Those feeding on the larger spiked speargrasses are better
protected from predators than those on soft-leafed
species.  
    Until 1950 only 12 specimens of speargrass weevils had
been found, in 4 localities.   Their rarity was considered
to result from the early practice of
  photo   
  caption  
burning tussock in the high-country sheep stations, or the
destruction of host plants by grazing animals.  
    Although there are suitable plants growing in most of
the natural tussock grasslands of the North Island, speargrass
weevils in the North Island are restricted to modified habitat
on the Wellington coastline.  
    The astelia weevil and the tussock weevil, large
flightless weevils found with speargrass weevils in both
grazed and ungrazed tussock lands, were almost exterminated
during the rat plagues that occurred in the mountains of the
South Island last century.   Rat outbreaks have not been
reported from the high country for the past 50 years, and
animals such as the large flightless weevils with limited
means of dispersal are slowly increasing.  
  photo  
  caption  
      Knobbled weevil     Hadramphus
stilbocarpae    
    Of all the large and flightless weevils in New
Zealand, the three species of   Hadramphus   are the
most ill-adapted to survival in landscapes modified by humans.
  Once found on Banks Peninsula and much of central
Canterbury,   Hadramphus tuberculatus   has not been
seen for more than 75 years and was probably eliminated by
rats.   A second species, called the coxella weevil, was
formerly present on Pitt Island, but is now found only on the
rat-free outlying islands in the Chathams group.   Here the
weevil 's food-plant of   Aciphylla dieffenbachii   is
confined to steep and inaccessible cliffs.  
    The knobbled weevil has had a chequered history and
was one of several native species to have been exterminated on
Big South Cape Island during the well-documented rat invasion
of 1962-63.   Ironically, the weevil was not officially
named until 1971, after its extinction, from specimens
collected some 15 years before.   Distinct populations of
the knobbled weevil are known from Bird Island in Foveaux
Strait and the Snares Islands, where
  caption  
  photo   
they live only on plants of   Stilbocarpa lyallii   or
  S. robusta  .   More recently,   Hadramphus  
weevils have been found to be common on the rat-free islets of
Breaksea Sound and Five Fingers Peninsula of Resolution Island
in Fiordland.   Here they are found on a different plant,
  Anisotome lyallii  .   The larvae feed upon the live
roots, and the adults chew large holes in the bases of the
leaf stems and feed on the sticky, resinous sap.   The
adults are active by night and congregate in large numbers on
a single plant.   They hide during the day in debris and
dead leaves on the ground at the base of the host plant,
whereas other suitable plants nearby will remain untouched.
  Why they should congregate in large numbers on a
particular plant until they have killed it is not known.
  This behaviour makes the knobbled weevil very prone to
attack by rats, and its presence or absence a good indicator
of whether there are rats on an island.  
  photo      
  

      ROSE FAMILY    
      Rosaceae  
  (rose-ay-see)  
      T  his worldwide but
mostly northern temperate family typically has flat
saucer-like flowers with five delicate petals and numerous
stamens.   Roses themselves are often bred so the flowers
are double - with so many petals the structure of the rose
flower is not obvious.   Apple trees and blackberries show
the flowers better.   Rosaceae include trees, shrubs, and
woody climbers, many of which have thorns or prickles.
  Both herbaceous and woody members often have leaves
composed of several leaflets.  
    Insect-pollination is the rule, but some genera have
wind-pollinated flowers lacking petals and nectar.   Carpels
are usually separate, each with its own style and stigma, an
unspecialised feature.  
    While the flowers help in unifying the family, the
fruits are diverse and used to define four subfamilies within
Rosaceae.   In the largest subfamily, the carpels are not
fused and each contains one seed.   Fruiting carpels are
often dry and may have hooks to aid dispersal.   Sometimes
each carpel has a fleshy coat and with others from the same
flower forms a cluster dispersed together as in blackberries
and raspberries.   In strawberries, an extension of the
flower stalk becomes fleshy around the dry carpels, while in
roses the stalk forms a fleshy cup, the rosehip, to enclose
the carpels.  
    In the second subfamily, each flower has only one
carpel.   The single seed sits inside a hard stone, usually
surrounded by a fleshy layer and outer skin.   The fruits of
  Prunus   are good examples, for this genus includes
plums, cherries, apricots, peaches, nectarines, as well as the
dry-coated almonds.  
    Fused carpels characterise the third subfamily.   A
fleshy outer layer formed from the flower stalk encloses the
papery carpel walls and several seeds.   Such fruits are
called pomes and include apples, pears and quinces as well as
the ornamental firethorns, rowans and cotoneasters.   The
fourth subfamily includes the garden spiraeas.   These have
capsules that open to release their seeds.  
    Native genera all belong to the first subfamily, and
in three of the four genera the typical rose-like flowers are
obvious.   The exception is our largest genus
  Acaena  , bidibids, where the flowers lack petals and
are wind-pollinated.   Bidibids (from the Maori piripiri)
are perennial herbaceous plants that form mats from creeping
rooting stems.   Leaves are made up of several leaflets
along two sides of a central stalk, and vary from pale green
to blue-grey or brown.   Flowers in
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
tight rounded heads have long filaments to hold the anthers
out from the heads, and feathery stigmas to pick up pollen.
  The fruit, of one or two carpels enclosed in a dry tube,
usually has long barbed spines to aid dispersal.   These
cling to passing animals and clothing.   Attractive spiny
fruits and coloured leaves make some bidibids popular
groundcover plants for gardens.  
    The five natives in the blackberry genus,
  Rubus  , have white flowers and yellow, orange, red or
black fruits.   Backward-pointing prickles on the undersides
of leaves and stems help the plants to climb but also snare
unwary passers-by, hence the name bush lawyer.   The
trailing   R. parvus   has the largest flowers and
fruits but grows only in the western South Island.   The
other four natives have small male and female flowers
clustered in large inflorescences on separate plants, and are
common vines of open habitats and forest gaps in both main
islands.  
    Our seven species of   Geum   and the single
native   Potentilla   all have pinnate leaves and dry
fruits.   A large terminal leaflet distinguishes
  Geum  , and all except one rare native have white
flowers.   The native potentilla is a creeping herbaceous
plant with small, yellow, saucer-shaped flowers typical of the
family.  
  photos  
  captions  
      COFFEE FAMILY    
      Rubiaceae  
  (ruby-ay-see)  
      M  any plants have
stipules, a pair of small flaps at the base of the leaf stalk
next to the stem, that protect young leaves and buds.
  These are always present in Rubiaceae and provide one of
the best clues to recognising this, the fourth largest
flowering plant family.   Leaves are always in pairs, one
leaf on each side of the stem, and so result in opposite pairs
of branches from buds in their axils.   The stipules on each
side of the leaf base are usually joined to those of the
opposite leaf, forming two common stipules that sit on the
stem between the leaf stalks.  
    Rubiaceae are mostly tropical and subtropical trees,
shrubs and climbers.   Those reaching temperate countries
are mainly herbaceous plants.  
    Flowers are usually insect-pollinated, with short
petal lobes and a long tube surrounding the stamens and often
the stigma as well.   Cultivated Rubiaceae include those
with colourful and complex flowers.   But in countries, such
as New Zealand, with few specialised insect pollinators,
native genera have simple flowers.  
    The varied dry or fleshy fruits help to identify
genera rather than the family.   The fleshy fruits of
  Coffea arabica   contain two "beans" each with a hard
outer layer.   This native of Ethiopia provides most of the
world 's coffee.  
      Coprosma   is our largest native genus and
gives the best fruiting displays of any native genus.
  Fruits, like those of coffee, usually contain two stones
each with a single seed.   Red fruits are commonest, but
others are orange, blue, white, pale yellow, violet, black or
even speckled.   The wind-pollinated flowers with reduced
petals are not typical of the family.   Male flowers with
four long dangling anthers and females with two long furry
stigmas are on different plants.   The fused stipules
identify the family and variations help to distinguish each of
the 50 or so species.  
    Plant habit, from mats to shrubs or small trees, and
the attractive foliage, make many coprosmas popular garden
plants.   Taupata,   C. repens  , with its glossy
green leaves, is one of the commonest and will form a good
hedge especially tolerant of salty coastal winds.   In the
wild, coprosmas grow everywhere, but are particularly plants
of scrubby and open vegetation, and forest understories.  
    Coprosmas show the paired branches of the family well.
  Many small-leaved shrubby species lack the dominant shoots
of most plants, and the numerous branches grow at wide angles
to interlace and form distinctive divaricating shrubs.
  This characteristic New 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
Zealand growth form is commonest in   Coprosma  .   It
allows the plant to position its leaves ready for
photosynthesis, even in winter, while protecting them from
frost and wind abrasion with an outer twiggy layer.  
    Crushed leaves and stems of a few coprosmas have a
revolting smell and the name   Coprosma   means
dung-smell.   The Maori used the sap and bark to treat cuts
and sores, not surprising as the powerful drug quinine also
belongs to this family.   Some Rubiaceae are important dye
plants, and coprosma bark provided the colour for khaki
uniforms of World War I soldiers.  
    Our other two native genera are herbaceous and have
inconspicuous flowers.   The nine naturalised and three
native bedstraws,   Galium  , have slender four-angled
stems often climbing through or over other vegetation.
  Their leaf-like stipules create a whorl of "leaves" at
each node.   Dry fruits with two one-seeded parts are
sometimes furnished with hooks, as in the weedy cleavers, to
aid dispersal.   The soft stems of   Nertera   root at
the nodes where there are small stipules between the pairs of
leaves.   Their usually fleshy red or orange fruits form
small splashes of colour in damp or shady places.  
  photos  
  captions  
      FOXGLOVE FAMILY    
      Scrophulariaceae  
  (scroff-you-larry-ay-see)  
      T  his worldwide, but
mainly temperate, family is well-represented in New Zealand,
being the fourth largest in our native flora.   Most members
are herbaceous or shrubby plants, but some are trees,
climbers, aquatics or semi-parasites.  
    Few other plant families can equal the diversity of
flowers found among the scrophs (as members of the family are
often called).   Typically, flowers are irregular and face
sideways.   Two of the petals often form an upper lip and
three a lower one, with all five joined into a tube near the
base.   But there are many more complex flowers adapted for
cross-pollination by insects and birds, ranging from long
tubes as in foxglove to small flowers with spreading petals as
in speedwells.   Petal number is reduced from five to four
in many genera and stamen number from five to four or two.
  In many scrophs the stigma protrudes beyond the anthers so
it is touched before the pollen.   In some, including our
native   Glossostigma  , the stigma is sensitive to
touch, closing for a while after contact with an insect.  
    Capsules with numerous small seeds are typical of the
family, but a few genera have fleshy fruits, or dry fruits
that do not open.  
    Ornamental garden scrophs include snapdragons, slipper
flowers, speedwells, penstemons, musks, nemesias, foxgloves
and our native hebes.   One of the few other commercial uses
of scrophs is the production of the heart drug digitalin from
foxgloves (  Digitalis   species).  
      Hebe  , with about 100 species, is the largest
genus in our native flora.   With   Parahebe   and
  Chionohebe  , it forms a group related to the
speedwell genus   Veronica   which also has two stamens
to each flower.   Only three hebes are native outside New
Zealand.   Two of our species occur in South America,
whereas the small French Polynesian island of Rapa has its own
hebe.   All hebes are woody.   Most are shrubs, some
merely creeping, but others reach the size of a small tree.
  Their leaves, in opposite pairs arranged in four ranks,
give a characteristic regular appearance to the shoots.
  Subalpine whipcord hebes look like conifers because of
their small scale-like leaves.   At the other extreme are
the large willow-like leaves of the lowland koromikos, eaten
as a cure for diarrhoea.  
    Compared with most scrophs, hebe flowers are simple.
  Most have four petals forming a funnel-like flower.   In
many of the shrubby species, flowers form brush-like
inflorescences bristling with stamens and styles.   Most
hebe flowers are white.   Some with fewer 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
flowers and spreading petals have brightly coloured anthers
and in others the petals are lilac.   One of the most
attractive is the New Zealand lilac which has diffuse
inflorescences of showy flowers.   Napuka,   Hebe
speciosa  , has deep magenta brush-like inflorescences and,
although rare in the wild, is a parent of many of the garden
hebes commonly grown in New Zealand and overseas.  
    Native parahebes usually have flowers even more like
those of speedwells.   Pollinators dislodge the anthers from
petal folds while seeking nectar from the base of the
flower.  
    The eyebrights,   Euphrasia  , with 25 species,
and the alpine   Ourisia   with 12, are the two other
large native genera of scrophs.   Both have four stamens in
pairs of different lengths, and sideways facing flowers with a
two-petalled upper and three-petalled lower lip.
  Eyebrights are semi-parasites invading the roots of other
plants but their green leaves make some of their own food.  
    Other natives include a purple musk
(  Mimulus  ) of coastal wetlands, and two species of
  Jovellana  , related to the South American slipper
flowers,   Calceolaria  , and with their petals
completely joined into a pouch-like tube.  
  photos  
  captions  
      POTATO FAMILY    
      Solanaceae  
  (sol-an-ay-see)  
      F  ew families provide as
many useful products as does the potato family, but it also
includes many weeds and poisonous plants.   Although found
worldwide, this is a largely Southern Hemisphere family with
its greatest diversity in tropical Central and South
America.  
    Most Solanaceae grow in disturbed habitats or arid
areas.   Many are herbaceous, while others are shrubs or
climbers.   A few are small trees.   Many have prickles or
produce nasty scents from bruised leaves or shoots.  
    The potato family is related to the foxglove family,
but the flowers are mostly regular.   Other distinctive
features are microscopic.   The fused petals are either
turned backwards or form a dish-like, tubular or bell-shaped
flower to attract insects, or in some cases birds as
pollinators.   Rather than spreading, the anthers often
touch one another and form a cone around the pistil.   They
release pollen either through holes at the top, or in the more
usual way through slits down the sides.  
    Fleshy berries containing numerous flat seeds are
often thought of as the characteristic fruit of this family.
  But some groups, for example tobaccos and petunias, have
capsules full of dust-like seeds.  
      It is strange to think that European cooking
lacked potatoes, tomatoes, paprika, chillies, cayenne pepper,
green, red and sweet peppers, cape gooseberry, tamarillo and
pepino before these members of the potato family were
introduced following the "discovery" of the Americas in late
15th century.   Many of these were staple foods for the
indigenous peoples of South America for centuries before this.
  Likewise, aubergines were eaten in Africa long before they
were used in Europe.  
    Potatoes arrived in Europe about 1573, and soon became
a staple food in Ireland.   In 1845 a fungus disease wiped
out the Irish potato crop resulting in starvation and mass
migration.  
    Tomatoes were initially thought to be poisonous or
were fed to stock.   By the late 18th century they were a
luxury food in Britain known as love apples.  
    Powerful chemicals called alkaloids occur in the
fruits and other tissues of many Solanaceae.   In small
quantities these may be useful drugs, as is atropine from
deadly nightshade, but when eaten indiscriminately they can
cause hallucinations or death.   All members of the family
should be treated with suspicion but the best-known poisonous
ones in New Zealand are: bittersweet, Jerusalem cherry,
henbane, angel 's trumpets, daturas, cestrum, and the green
parts of potatoes.  
    Tobacco, so popular for smoking, chewing and 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
snuff, contains the toxic alkaloid nicotine, which is also a
powerful insecticide.   It is difficult now to imagine the
astonishment of Columbus when he first saw American indians
smoking.   Just over a century later, the King of England
tried in vain to stop the "loathsome" habit there.  
    Showy flowers and fruits make many Solanaceae
attractive garden plants.   Petunias, marmalade bush,
flowering tobaccos, potato vine and Chinese lantern plant are
examples.  
    The potato genus itself,   Solanum  , includes
1400 species, three of which are native and 19 naturalised
here.   Small-flowered nightshade is now most common on
off-shore islands, having been largely replaced by its
European relative, black nightshade, on the mainland.   Both
have white flowers.   Small-flowered nightshade is a common
plant in the Pacific and may be a Maori introduction.
  Black nightshade is a common garden weed often called
deadly nightshade in New Zealand.   True deadly nightshade,
with its bell-shaped purplish flowers, is rare here.  
    Our other two natives are called poroporo.   These
are closely related soft-wooded shrubs of lowland and coastal
forest margins and clearings.   One has blue-purple and the
other lavender to white flowers.   Our poroporos are
cultivated in Eastern Europe to produce alkaloids used in
contraceptive pills.  
  photos  
  captions      
  

          BLUE DUCK - Symbol of wild and untamed
rivers      photo  
  caption    
    FOR ANYONE who has tramped through the
mountains of New Zealand, the whistle of the blue duck is
one of the most characteristic sounds of the wilderness.
  The spectacle of a pair of blue ducks bobbing downstream
with their fluffy chicks, expertly negotiating rapids and
white water, is unique to unmodified mountain rivers.   Even
the most hardened back country traveller treasures the memory
of these tame and confiding birds.   Yet, despite its legal
protection, the future of the blue duck is by no means
secure.  
    Blue ducks are river specialists, a distinction
they share with few other species of duck world-wide, notably
the African black duck, Salvadori 's duck of Papua New Guinea
and the torrent ducks of South America.   None of these
species are closely related.   All have evolved separately
to live in the difficult fast-water habitat - a
text  -  book case of convergent evolution.   The blue
duck is an ancient New Zealand species.   It has very simple
courtship displays and is territorial - unusual features
for a duck.   Most revealing, however, are the distinctive
proteins that make up its feathers.   These are an important
indication of its genetic uniqueness and ancient
origins.    
        Species in decline      
    When Forster, a naturalist on Cook 's Endeavour, first
described the blue duck, it was present throughout the
mountains of the New Zealand mainland.   It appears to have
been common in all forested river catchments, particularly in
steep high altitude areas, and occasionally right to the coast
as observed in Fiordland.   Well known to the Maori, it was
an important source of food on inland expeditions.   They
named it   whio   after the distinctive whistling
call of the male bird.   For the early European explorers it
was a charming and friendly source of companionship and
amusement.   So tame in fact that it often ended up in the
billy for the evening meal.  
    Charlie Douglas, the famous surveyor of South
Westland, noted that   "...its prevailing
characteristic is stupidity to an amazing degree.
    This combined with what appears to be a fatal thirst
for admiration is its ruin, and make it an easy prey to dogs
and men, and nothing but the inaccessible places it frequents
saves it from being exterminated.  "     Blue ducks
were a staple food of back country explorers such as
Barrington who, on his epic exploration of the Red Hills in
West Otago, ate blue ducks to help survive the rigours of this
remote and unforgiving country.  
    Early oral records show that blue ducks were
widespread and abundant.   Sadly, that is not the case
today.   Most birds are now confined to unmodified mountain
rivers in the central North Island and western South Island.
  River diversion and hydro dams for irrigation or power
generation have turned clear rushing waters into slow
turbid streams, as in the headwaters of the Whanganui River.
  Forest removal and agricultural development have led to
siltation of clean rivers and the loss of necessary riparian
(streamside) vegetation.   Populations of introduced trout
compete with blue duck for in-stream invertebrate food
sources.   Introduced predators threaten accessible
populations of the blue duck, whose ground nesting habits make
it especially vulnerable.   Its only natural predators were
other birds such as the black-backed gull and maybe the native
falcon or now extinct birds of prey.  
    Concern has been mounting in recent years over the
apparent contraction of blue  photo  
  caption   
duck distribution.   Trampers and hunters noted its
disappearance from favoured back country haunts such as the
Tararua Ranges.   Sightings of birds, and systematic surveys
of rivers, in the Arthur 's Pass area show that blue ducks have
disappeared from several river tributaries over the last 20
years.   But detailed monitoring of small populations has so
far failed to provide a conclusive answer to one of the
mysteries of blue duck populations - where do all the young
birds disperse?  
    Most years there is a surplus of fledglings, but
very few manage to either  photo  
  caption  
squeeze in a new territory amongst existing pairs,
displace an adult bird, or fill the gap left by a dead bird.
  However, numerous sightings of blue ducks on alpine
tarns and of single male birds have suggested that young birds
are more mobile than previously expected.   This has been
confirmed recently by sightings of colour-banded birds in
rivers some distance from their home territory in both the
North and South Islands.  
    Blue duck show all the symptoms of a species in
decline.   Populations are scattered between the
headwater tributaries of major rivers.   Blue ducks are
present in some streams but absent from adjacent, and
apparently similar, streams.   The lower modified reaches of
rivers are usually unoccupied as though blue ducks are
reluctant to disperse over land or across unfavourable
habitat.   While the total population is estimated to be
about three  photo  
  caption   
to four thousand adults, this is split into
    discreet    discrete     sub-populations.
  The largest two in the North Island are the 40 pairs in
each of the Motu and Whanganui catchments.   Their small
size and lack of interaction makes these populations
increasingly vulnerable to habitat changes.  
    In 1980, Wildlife Service (now DoC) scientist Murray
Williams set out to solve the mysteries of the blue duck by
studying their ecology on the Manganui-a-te-Ao River, a
tributary of the Whanganui.   The stimulus, Murray recalls,
came from two people - Janet Kear of England 's Wildfowl Trust
and US waterfowl biologist Frank McKinney.   They had
carried out brief  photo  
  caption   
studies of blue duck and recognised the need for further, more
detailed, research.   As well as their encouragement there
was a conservation imperative.   The National Government 's
subsidised loans for small hydro schemes had focussed
attention on the Manganui-a-te-Ao.   The entire river, the
only remaining free-flowing tributary of the Whanganui rising
in Tongariro National Park, was under threat.  
    For over ten years, Murray colour-banded every
resident bird and all juvenile birds that fledged in a ten
kilometre stretch of the river, monitoring an increase from
four to nine pairs.   Initially limited to 20 field days
each year, the research project is now one of the longest
studies of any duck species in the world and certainly the
most important study of a riverine duck.   It has revealed
some interesting results.   Most significant is that
inbreeding appears to be a natural feature of the blue duck
population - a surprising discovery in light of the
widely-held view that a broad genetic base is essential for
the long term survival of a species.   Colour banding of
individuals by Murray, and genetic 'fingerprinting' by fellow
DoC scientist Sue Triggs, has confirmed that there are
successful brother-sister pairings and even a
grandmother-grandson pairing.   In this study no duckling
established a territory more than ten kilometres from its
natal area.  
    Blue ducks have much in common with other relict New
Zealand species.   They are relatively long-lived, have a
low reproductive rate and irregular breeding success,
similar to our more critically endangered species.
  Fortunately, the blue duck is still what Murray calls a
   'second tier'   species.   The blue duck joins
a long list of native birds which are still reasonably
widespread but are nowhere common.   Birds like the kea,
kaka, kiwi, falcon, robin and blue duck are still adjusting to
extensive loss of habitat, introduced predators and
competition from browsing mammals.   At least with these
species, early attention may ensure that last-ditch rescue
programmes, like those mounted for the black robin, black
stilt and kakapo, may not be necessary.  
        Suited to fast water      
    Blue ducks are admirably suited to the fast water
habitat.   Their strong webbed feet can propel them across
rushing white water - the young chicks literally run across
the top.   They are superb divers and adept at foraging
amongst the stones in riffles, and in the lee of large
boulders.   A curious-looking black flap on either side of
the bill protects it from abrasion against rocks.   So harsh
is their rough rocky home that plastic leg bands can wear
through completely in two years and the identification
numbers stamped into the thick aluminium bands soon become
illegible.  
    Blue ducks rely on insect larvae for food.   These
invertebrates live on and under the stones of the river,
occasionally drifting downstream, particularly in floods.
  Recent studies by Kevin Collier (DoC) and Clare Veltman
and Ian Henderson (Massey University) indicate that large prey
items, particularly caddis fly larvae, are preferred in North
Island rivers.   The frequent shiny dark fragments of insect
exoskeleton in their conspicuous droppings testify to their
rich invertebrate diet.   In the Southern Alps, where blue
ducks are present in the subalpine zone, fruit from riparian
shrubs forms an important part of their autumn diet.   I
have observed blue ducks amongst the streamside shrubs,
gorging themselves on Coprosma berries and leaving
thousands of undigested seeds splattered on the open
riverbed.  
    Year-round territoriality has probably evolved from
the need for a pair to maintain their breeding partnership
and to defend their nesting and feeding areas.
  Observations by blue duck researchers, including my own
over several years in the Arthur 's Pass area, indicate that
the main constraint on blue duck productivity is the
availability of females.   Female blue ducks have a lower
survival rate than males, because of the energy demands of
producing eggs and their vulnerability to predators
during nesting.   Males are more common.   They often
engage in spectacular fights, swiping at each other with the
prominent spurs on their wings, when competing for the limited
number of females.  
        Recovery plan      
    Work on blue duck is now coordinated by a national
liaison group with representatives from DoC, Forest and
Bird, Ducks Unlimited and universities, as well as independent
researchers.   The group 's working document, compiled after
the first national blue duck meeting in 1987, has directed
efforts over the last five years.   A revised version of
this Blue Duck Recovery Plan will guide blue duck work for the
next decade, identifying research and monitoring
priorities for blue duck conservation.   The annual meetings
of the group provide valuable forums for discussing the latest
research results and for encouraging  photo  
  caption   
regional conservation projects.   Colour-banding of
individual birds and monitoring of small populations is now
occurring in most blue duck areas.  
    Several studies of blue duck ecology are being carried
out by Massey University and DoC researchers, including an
important study of the effects of introduced trout on blue
duck productivity.   Birds have been transferred from the
central North Island to Mt Taranaki where they have
successfully established a new breeding population.   Also,
scientists are experimenting with radio transmitters in an
attempt to solve the great blue duck mystery - Where do all
the young birds go?   Preliminary results show that some
young males move right out of the catchment, returning again
after a few months.  
    An important part of this national conservation
effort is captive breeding.   'Operation Whio' aims to
breed blue ducks in captivity for eventual release into the
wild to supplement existing populations or establish new ones.
  Over 40 blue ducks, nearly all raised in captivity, are
now held in aviaries around the country.   The breeding
effort is coordinated by Ducks Unlimited, a national
waterfowl organisation.  
    The Mt Taranaki experiment has shown that it should be
possible to re-establish blue duck in areas where they have
become extinct.   However, further research to determine
the critical requirements of good blue duck habitat is
essential, as the reasons for the decline in blue duck
populations are still not clearly understood.   A survey
of blue duck habitat throughout the country by scientist Kevin
Collier has shown that favourable rivers tend to have narrow
channels, high gradients and stability, low summer water
temperatures, large boulders, and intact native forest as
riparian vegetation.  
    With an improved understanding of blue duck ecology,
and the guidance of a recovery plan, efforts to protect
the species can be better directed.   According to Murray
Williams, the key to survival of the species lies in the
protection of successful family lines.   Some pairs are very
productive, consistently raising at least two young per year
on average.   Other pairs rarely succeed in their
breeding attempts.   He found the recovery of the blue duck
population on the Manganui-a-te-Ao was primarily due to the
efforts of two pairs whose abundant offspring colonised the
vacant territories up and down the river.  
    In an effort to assist the Manganui-a-te-Ao blue duck
population, white water rafters have voluntarily agreed to
stop rafting down the river during the critical months of
October and November, when newly born chicks are vulnerable to
outside disturbance.  
    Unfortunately, the major threat to the survival of the
blue duck, and the historic cause of its decline, is still
with us.   Destruction or modification of blue duck
habitat continues today and has taken on a whole new meaning
with the creation of Electricorp - a State Owned Enterprise
which believes it has a mandate to increase electricity
consumption.   With the growing demand for energy, pressure
is mounting to increase hydro power generation from the
country 's untamed rivers.   The Government does not have an
energy conservation policy and New Zealanders are facing a
succession of battles throughout the country as wild
rivers are eyed by electricity producers to supply more power.
  Increasing hydro power generation is not necessary if
proper energy conservation and energy efficiency measures
are implemented.  
    The blue duck requires unmodified rivers.   Its
present distribution is testimony to this.   While the
intricate ecological requirements of the blue duck are still
only partially understood, there is no doubt about its
requirement for a pristine habitat.   The blue duck is a
symbol for the life-blood of the country - our wild and scenic
rivers.   Its presence indicates healthy and unmodified
river ecosystem, upon which many agricultural, industrial and
urban uses downstream are dependent.   If New Zealand
loses the distinctive '  whio  ...   whio  ...'
from its mountain streams then it has lost not only a national
symbol of the back country, but will have sacrificed the
quality and character of the country 's river
systems.    
  

    T  HE SLAUGHTER WAS dreadful, and went on for
years.   Each morning crushed corpses lay strewn over the
battle zone, and yet within days - often by the very next
night - plentiful reinforcements would pour out from their
concealed lairs only to be trampled beneath father 's solid
slippers.  
    My mother 's periodic complaints about the unsightly
and slippery desecration of paths and lawns did little to stem
the carnage.   But, like many of history 's more prolonged
battle campaigns, there was no clearcut winner.
  Indefatigable persistence won my father a measure of
control, but never victory.   As every gardener knows, it 's
hard to eliminate slugs and snails.   Those nocturnal
armies seem to spring from the ground, leaving a wake of
perforated plants, silver trails and green faeces.  
    Although   Helix aspersa  , the common
garden snail, and its many pestiferous slug cousins are
European immigrants, New Zealand is well endowed with its own
native snail fauna, plus a sprinkling of slugs.   These
natives spurn agricultural delicacies, far preferring the dank
underworld of the forest floor, and it is likely that most New
Zealanders have never seen a single one, although we may
have as many as 1000 species.  
    Most land slugs and snails constitute a distinct
group of air-breathing gastropod (one-shelled) molluscs named
pulmonates.   The best way to understand snails is to think
of them as an amalgamation of four components: a shell
(for protection), a head (for sensing the world outside), a
foot (for movement) and a body mass (to keep the rest
functioning).  
    One of the features that separate molluscs from all
other animals is the mantle, a membranous extension of the
body which is responsible for making the shell.   In
gastropods there is a space between this mantle and the main
body of the animal.   The space is large when the animal is
extended and crawling, and small when the animal has retracted
into the shell.  
    Pulmonates have enclosed this space - termed the
mantle cavity - to form an air-breathing lung.   A small
hole, the pneumostome, allows air in and out.  
    Each individual snail usually has both male and female
reproductive organs, so they are true hermaphrodites.
  The reproductive system is elaborate, and its details are
used to separate one species from another.   Snails also
possess sophisticated digestive, circulatory, nervous,
excretory and locomotory systems.   Surprisingly for
such complex animals, they seem able to regenerate all body
parts except the central nervous system.  
    While most people may not find snails a particularly
riveting subject, there is a smattering of enthusiasts in whom
snails inspire intense devotion.   Guru of this select
company is Dr Frank Climo,
  photo  
  caption  
Curator of Molluscs at Wellington 's National Museum.
  Frank readily concedes that for him snails are more than a
mere passion.     "  Snails are the key to my world
view.   In their spiral shapes I see a reflection of the
world 's symmetry, the movement of tectonic plates, and
much more."      
    Frank 's search for keys to understanding the
relationships and distribution of our snails has led him
to embrace the panbiogeographical ideas of Frenchman Leon
Croizat.  
    Panbiogeography emphasises the prominence of earth
movements such as continental drift and plate tectonics in
accounting for present-day distributions of organisms.
  When land masses collide, the organisms get mixed
together.   As one land mass slides under another, life
forms pile up at the boundary, much as goods accumulate at the
end of a conveyor belt.   By looking at present
distributions of organisms one can reconstruct
prehistoric geology.  
    Although this sounds fairly reasonable, in some of
Frank 's recent writing panbiogeography seems to burst out from
the prosaic manacles of snail taxonomy to recast the world.
  In the   New Zealand Journal of Zoology   Frank
writes:   "Panbiogeography will remove much fear ....
from the international community.     This reduction
in fear levels (a measure of the reducing power of the
collective unconscious) will improve international
relations, make rabid 'nationalism' irrelevant and thus
make humanity more healthy.  "    
    Despite Frank 's somewhat unorthodox ideas on
panbiogeography and snails as the key to the cosmos, he does
know a lot about these creatures.   His special interest
is the myriad species of small snails found throughout New
Zealand.   The largest of them would be the size of the
extinct one cent piece, but most are much smaller, and plenty
are no larger than a pinhead.   Shy and retiring, they
are the sort of thing that you rarely find unless you are
looking for them, and not too many people grub in the dark
heaps of decaying leaves and wood favoured by the snails.
  Even then, it takes a trained eye to spot them.  
    Often they are more abundant on the fringes of bush
than in the impenetrable depths.   Occasionally, they
crop up in unexpected places.   Grafton Gully in central
Auckland sported an attractive stand of bush last century, but
now there remains only a smattering of scrubby natives
leavening a mass of indifferent exotics.   The small area is
squeezed between encroaching buildings on one side and
concrete capillaries of the motorway system on the other.
  Wandering Jew climbs rampant over everything.   Yet,
wonder of wonders, there are a surprising number of small
native snails under this lush carpet.   Perhaps 10 or 15
native species are in residence, and at least one is
flourishing.  
    A far greater range of species can be found in
Auckland 's Waitakere Ranges.   Jim Goulstone, a
knowledgeable snail enthusiast and a professional
tomato grower, has compiled a checklist of 120 species found
in the Waitakeres.   An extra 30 species occur in other bush
areas in the greater Auckland area.   Many have a
surprisingly narrow distribution.   "You would
expect there to be north-south differences in snail
distribution in New Zealand,"   explains Jim,
  "and there are some, but there are also marked
east-west differences, even when the country is as narrow as
it is around Auckland.     Quite a few extra species can
be uncovered in the Hunuas that aren't present in the
Waitakeres.  "    
    I asked him how he went about collecting small
snails.  
      "  The most important thing I take is a good
heavy duty pair of leggings.
  photos  
  captions  
  In the bush I seem to spend a lot of time grovelling
around on hands and knees, and it 's always wet.   Usually I
head for a spot that isn't too damp, because dead shells don't
last long in the wet.   Somewhere a bit drier, ideally
beside a vertical wall, a place the snails might fall off, can
be good.  
      "  One of the very best spots is a really big
old rimu tree.   Snails live under the flaky bark on the
lower trunk, and this is constantly falling off and rotting at
the foot of the tree.   Once you 've got under the dry
surface leaves into the fine tilth, you 're where the snails
are.   Fine, black compost is what you want most of all.
  Another good spot is under the bark of a fallen tree.
  After the tree has rotted to the right stage the bark
lifts off in large plates.   Snails like the black humus
between bark and trunk.  
      "  Some sorts of fungus do a great job on fallen
wood.   They destroy everything except the cell walls,
and you can push your foot right through the log.   In there
you always find   Charopa  .   Rotting nikau fronds
are not a bad place to find snails either.   The bases are
tough and smooth, so they provide a good surface to see the
regularity of the snail shell on.   There are quite a lot of
things that resemble shells at first glance - seeds, rolled up
arthropods and especially coiled millipedes.   Some trees
such as kauri and tanekaha never have many snails associated
with them.   Roots overgrow their tough leaves before
they ever compost."      
    So, having found a likely spot and done a bit of
grovelling in the humus, what next?     "  Finding
some snails indicates
  caption  
  photos  
  caption  
more in hiding, so I collect a few litres of leaf
mould to sort through at home.   After drying it out in the
boiler house used for heating the glasshouses, I put it
through two sieves.   The coarse one was put together
from plastic mesh used to stop leaves blocking downpipes, and
the second one is a fine garden sieve.   Other people use
different methods.   David Roscoe [a snail enthusiast from
Nelson] somehow manages to float the small snails off in a
dish of water.   It 's amazing watching him pluck those tiny
little shells off the surface of the water with his
fingers."      
    Jim prefers to use an artist 's brush that has had most
of its bristles removed.   He waves a particularly
emaciated brush at me and explains that the snails get held
between the hairs, making it easy to transfer them from the
sieved leaf fractions to their final resting place: customised
matchboxes stored in shallow tray filing cabinets.
  Inspection of the matchboxes reveals that each (of the
thousands in Jim 's collection) is fitted with a polystyrene
insert in which a hole has been cut to contain the snails.
  A small sheet of thin glass covers each box.  
    The shells look perpetually secure, but apparently
not so.   Most small land snail shells are precariously
fragile - mainly protein with little calcium carbonate.
  Leaf litter tends to be acidic, and thin calcium shells
would be in danger of being
  photos  
  caption  
dissolved by acid.   A protein skin on the shell - termed a
periostracum - protects the shell from this hazard.
  caption    photo  
  There are other problems with storage, as Jim
explains:   "Frequently - especially if they are put
away damp - a white crystalline substance forms on the shell
and starts to eat into it.     They call it museum
disease, and once it gets a hold the shells don't last long.
  A lot of old shells in the core museum collections have
completely disintegrated.  "    
    Fortunately, these collections are constantly being
replenished by the efforts of amateur collectors who
  photo  
send the minute fruit of their searches down to Frank Climo.
  He adds interesting specimens to the museum 's
collections and uses the material as grist for his taxonomic
and biogeographical studies.  
    These collectors are a vital part of the scientific
process and are experts in their own right.   Most have
discovered new species of snails, and some have been
rewarded by having species named after them.  
    David Roscoe, inspired by the expanding database
being built up on snails, is pushing for the government to
provide funding for a national database on all animal and
plant species.       "It would contain detailed
distributional data as well as information on the
characteristics of species, and be widely available.   A
teacher waiting to lead a biology field trip could access the
database to ascertain detailed information on species in
the area of the proposed visit.   It would be of great use
to amateur and
  photo  
  caption  
professional alike, whether interested in taxonomy,
environmental monitoring or whatever."      
    David, along with Pauline Mayhill, an avid Tauranga
collector, has already started the scheme for snails.  
    Norman Gardner, a retired cabinet maker in Birkenhead,
Auckland, was perhaps the first of the scientific amateurs to
become really interested in snails, and he has been pursuing
them for close to 50 years.
  caption  
  photo  
  Although still very active in snail work, he has
followed a somewhat different trajectory.   In
recent years he has left New Zealand snails to others and
concentrated on the many neglected Pacific Island species.  
    Colourful tree snails are common in the islands,
whereas New Zealand has no true tree snails.   There are
also fewer small species than in New Zealand, but more larger
ones, though there is nothing to compare with the
magnificence of our   Powelliphanta  .  
    The minute New Zealand species are also more notable
for architectural exuberance.   Sculptural detail of
such delicacy that it requires a scanning electron
microscope to unlock its intricacies is common.   Some
species are tall spired, others flat, and every
conceivable intermediate form exists.   Some resemble
beehives while others compensate for more pedestrian form
with elaborate surface plates, giving them the appearance of
mini-turbines.   Hairs and bristles cover the surface of
many species, and yet others sport complex arrays of plates in
their apertures.  
    The functional significance of much of this
sculpture is obscure, but one guess is that the sculpture
stops dirt clinging to the shell.   To a two-millimetre
snail, even a speck of dirt could represent a sizeable
burden.   photo  
  caption  
  Longer shells (10mm-plus) are much less
elaborate.   Apertural plates perhaps serve to reduce water
loss from the resting animal.   To a slimy, soft-bodied
mollusc, living in air is hazardous.   Drying out is a
constant danger, hence the damp habitats and nocturnal
behaviour.  
    Yet droughts do occur, and snails have to cope.
  Many species are able to go into a state of quiescence -
termed aestivation.   Some secrete a tough mucus membrane
(an epiphragm) to close out the world, and pulmonates can lose
an astonishing amount of their body weight (50-80 per
cent) by dehydration without suffering irreversible damage.
  In cold areas snails may also hibernate in
  cartoon  
winter.  
    If you are a slug or snail, just getting around
uses up a lot of water - it 's almost a fuel.   Mucus, that
silver trail snails leave, is essential in locomotion, and
water is its main constituent.   Prevent the snail
secreting mucus and it can't move.   Although all snail
mucus seems glutinous and clinging, it apparently has
different properties depending on whether it 's on the back of
the animal, in the gut or lubricating the sole of the
foot.  
    Mucus also has a role in mating, with some introduced
slugs copulating while suspended from long mucus
ropes.   Thus separated from the confines of terra firma,
they unfurl their copulatory organs - in one Swiss species to
a remarkable 80cm - and exchange packets of sperm.   After
disentangling their entwined parts, one slug falls to the
ground, leaving the other to climb back up its slimy tresses.
  Partners often store the sperm "for a rainy day" -
literally.   They fertilise their eggs only on wetter
days more suited to egg laying.  
    The mating habits of our 20 or 30 native slugs are
unknown.   These species occur mostly in the South Island,
and all belong to one distinctive group.   They bear a
close resemblance to a slender four-centimetre-long dead
leaf of yellowish hue with darker veins.   The slime they
exude has a distinct yellow tinge.   A few species have the
eyes on short stalks, but there are no other tentacles.
  Some favour damp leaves or rotting wood while others
prefer the closeness of flax and nikau palm leaf bases.  
    Slugs are really just land snails without shells, but
many still possess internal shell rudiments.   A few snail
species seem to be halfway between slugs and snails, with
shells still clearly visible but reduced to fig-leaf
proportions.   Members of the genus   Schizoglossa  
are one such group.   The shell looks like that of a 15mm
paua, but provides meagre protection for the 50mm animal.  
      Schizoglossa   is allied to our most
spectacular native snails - indeed, some of the most striking
land snails to be found anywhere.   These are members of the
family Paraphantidae, particularly the genus
  Powelliphanta  .   It is named after Dr A.W.B.
Powell, a former conchologist at Auckland Museum who studied
  photos  
  captions  
the snails during the 1930s and   '40s  .   Unlike the
smaller natives talked about earlier, these snails are large
(diameter 40-110mm) and strikingly beautiful.   Some of the
largest are plain old-gold coloured, but most resemble
polished wood with patterns of axial or spiral stripes in
blacks, browns and gold.  
    Headquarters of the group are the forests of
north-west Nelson, but others extend down to Fiordland,
Southland and across the Marlborough Sounds, with a few in the
North Island - around Levin and a smattering through the
southern axial ranges as far north as Egmont and Waikaremoana.
  Some species live at low altitudes, but a number prefer
the subalpine environment at 700-1200m.  
      Unlike the small snails, which feed on the
microscopic fungi and algal films on detritus,
  Powelliphanta   are carnivores.   For the most part
they live deeply buried in leaf mould and feed on large
(20cm-plus) native worms, sucking them in like spaghetti.
  Because the worms are large, the snails need eat only
occasionally.  
      Powelliphanta   are not exactly outgoing.
  At times photographer Michael Schneider and I crouched for
four or five hours vainly waiting for snails to emerge from
their shells.   And if they were coy about public
appearances, eating in front of humans must have been the
ultimate breach of snail etiquette.   Pushing enormous worms
into their faces elicited not the slightest interest (though
later Michael was successful with garden worms.)  
    Anne Strachan, who kept   Powelliphanta   for
several years, noted peculiarities in the   snails'  
eating behaviour.     "It seemed to me that the
snails put out a substance that affected the worms when they
wanted to feed,"   she told me.     "Usually
the worms crawl over the snail 's mucus trails no trouble at
all, but when the snail is hungry, the worm blanches and goes
limp as soon as it touches snail mucus."    
    Unfortunately, the snails themselves seem to be a
desirable item on quite a few other menus.  
    Kath Walker, who has had a long interest in these
snails and now works for the Department of Conservation in
Nelson, showed us a selection of mutilated shells.
  "  Rats are a real menace, especially in lowland
situations.   They start chewing the lip of the shell and
slowly work around the main whorls, devouring the animal
as they go.   Wekas tend to destroy the spire of the shells
with their beaks in their efforts to extract the animal.
  Pigs simply crush the whole shell.   Other birds,
probably keas and kakas, peck into the body whorl beside the
aperture, although sometimes the shell is sufficiently tough
that they don't succeed in getting in."    
    Predation by vertebrates is the main cause of
mortality in   Powelliphanta  .   Considering all
species, probably two thirds of dead shells bear damage
attributable to one of these predators.  
    Kath has set up snail houses in the grounds of several
homes she has occupied and after a lot of tedious work in
providing the moisture, humidity, calcium and food they need,
has succeeded in growing and breeding   Powelliphanta  ,
making many unique and fascinating observations along the way.
  For instance, she recalls seeing two snails trying to
eat the same worm.   "  One evening a medium-sized
snail had almost completely ingested a big worm when a larger
snail latched onto the other end.   Next morning, both
snails were still mouth to mouth, tugging at the worm, but the
bigger snail finally got it all."    
    Her measurements and weighings of captive snails and
her field work in monitoring two South Island
  Powelliphanta   populations have put Kath in a unique
position to know how rapidly the snails grow.
    "Generally the shell 's lip extends by 5-8mm
per year, so large snails could be 10-20 years or
older."    
    Such ages place   Powelliphanta   amongst the
Methuselahs of the snail universe, where lifespans of 1-5
years are common.  
    Like many longer-lived animals,
  Powelliphanta   lays a small number of large eggs.
  Although hermaphrodites,   Powelliphanta  
usually mate and fertilise each other.   Mating involves
one snail sitting on top of another and the two exchanging
sperm packets.   It is accompanied by a lot of
  drawing and photo  
  captions  
bubbles.  
    It seems that fertilisation does not always require
two individuals.   Kath Walker kept a solitary
  Powelliphanta   in monastic confinement for 18 months,
and this individual eventually produced fertile eggs,
suggesting that snails may self-fertilise if necessary.
  (Some doubt remains, because snails can store viable sperm
from another snail for long periods.)  
    According to Kath,   Powelliphanta   lay one or
two eggs per week during the spring, and they are huge
compared to the size of the snail.   Shaped like
  birds'   eggs, the largest are 12-14mm long - not much
smaller than a sparrow 's egg!   Eggs are laid in the ground
(from an aperture near the mouth, not the rear end) and
require 2-9 months to hatch out a young snail.  
    I can't help wondering if some of these youngsters
ever see daylight.   They are nocturnal, and with one
species the only live specimens we unearthed were buried
beneath 300mm of decayed beech litter and sinewy roots - deep
and inaccessible enough to escape all predators... except
man.      

  

        GARBAGE    
      Living in a throwaway world    
By Andrea Lomdahl  photo  
  caption  
      R  ECENTLY I MADE ONE of my regular
pilgrimages to the local landfill to dispose of the
household waste products which I had not been able to recycle
or fit into the plastic rubbish bags the local council
provides.   Recycling facilities at the landfill are
rather limited, consisting simply of three bins in which to
put green, brown and clear glass containers.   One would
think that people would find this system fairly simple to
follow, but I discovered when I went to recycle my bottles
that the different colours of glass had been well mixed up in
the bins, and all sorts of other unsavoury rotting rubbish had
been thrown in as well.  
    I have observed on many other occasions that the
valiant recycling efforts that manage to get off the ground in
our society are often thwarted by ignorant behaviour of this
sort.   This set me thinking about the problems of dealing
with the huge amounts of the waste we generate, and how one
might encourage some sensible reduction in this waste
quantity.   It is clear firstly that we should all take
a hard look at ourselves and our own wasteful habits.    
      Golden Rules    
    The four principles of dealing with rubbish should be:
use less, re-use, recycle and dispose of safely - in that
order.  
    We are all part of a disturbingly wasteful consumer
society that seems determined to use the Earth 's resources as
fast as possible.   We readily bow down to the demands of
fashion, changing our clothes, car, household fittings and
anything else we think might not measure up to the standards
set by our neighbours.   That is of course if we have the
money to do so.   Otherwise we simply wish we had the money
to be wasteful like everyone else.  
    I attended the inaugural conference of the Institute
of Waste Management recently, and one of the speakers,
Alastair Gunn of Waikato University, said in response to a
question, that in his view the meaning of life to most
children was "shopping".   No doubt the remark was somewhat
tongue-in-cheek, but there is also a considerable amount of
truth in it.   On the one hand we berate the Government and
local authorities for not doing enough about "The Waste
Problem", and on the other hand we bring up our children in
the same image of ourselves, that is as materialistic
consumers.  
    We all think environmental problems should be solved,
but preferably by others, and that gets me back to recycling.
  It takes a little bit of effort to separate out the brown,
green and clear bottles, and obviously some people are not
able to make this effort.   There are also those who would
deliberately thwart such initiatives by throwing in any old
rubbish, and very little can be done about these
people.  
      Everyone 's Responsibility.    
    It takes an effort to make recycling successful,
and this effort must in part at least be at an individual
level.   Each one of us must take responsibility in some
small way for the global environmental crisis, for it is
simply the outcome of the collective selfishness and greed of
many millions of people.  
    This is not to say, however, that all levels of
government should not be making much more effort to promote
waste reduction and reuse and ensure wastes are managed
properly.   Politicians are certainly raising
environmental issues regularly at present as these issues are
popular ones.   It is to be hoped that very soon the actions
on resource conservation start following the words.  
    One example is the report on "Packaging and the New
Zealand Environment" produced recently by the Ministry for
the Environment.   It was generally a well-written report
which outlined some useful initiatives, but it backs away from
the real interventions needed to have a strong impact on the
way we manage waste.   It sets a target for a 20 percent
reduction in solid waste volumes by  photo  
  caption  
1993, but it does not give any convincing ways for achieving
this target.  
    There are very good reasons for actively encouraging
waste reduction and recycling.   We thereby conserve
resources, promote a conservation approach, reduce pollution
associated with disposal of waste, and, most importantly to
some, we can save money by reducing the quantities of refuse
that need to be disposed of in expensive landfills.  
    There are also plenty of opportunities for recycling,
for example glass, plastics, paper, aluminium cans, other
metals, oil, solvents, textiles.   In some cases such as oil
and scrap steel, government changes to cost structures have
indirectly worked against recycling.  
    Last year 10 million litres of lead-contaminated
oil was dumped or burned in New Zealand because it was
supposedly more economic to buy new oil from the Middle East
rather than collect it from around the country for
recycling.  
    Deregulation of the scrap industry has been good and
bad news for recycling.   Good quality scrap steel is
vigorously pursued and often exported, whereas unprofitable
low grade steel is often neglected, although to the credit of
both landfill operators and the scrap metal industry, some
efforts are being made to recycle unprofitable or
marginally profitable scrap steel.  
    Before 1983, all car batteries were New Zealand-made
and recycled to recover and re-use lead.   The industry was
protected by special licences and by duties on imported
batteries which cannot be recycled.   The licences and
duties have now been lifted and imported batteries have
flooded into the country.   In 1983, 4644 batteries were
imported but this rose to 72,543 in 1988.   Today few
batteries are recycled - many are probably sitting in
sheds, backyards or at the tip leaking lead and other toxic
chemicals into the environment.  
      Recycling Wrongs    
    If the opportunities are there, and the reasons are
there, what is going wrong?   There are a number of
successful recycling ventures, but many others have been
attempted and subsequently abandoned because there was no
money in it.   There are a number of reasons for this,
including the fact that prices do not reflect the true value
of raw resources, and that true costs of landfilling are often
not reflected in setting landfill charges.   There are
also technical difficulties in reusing many wastes, and often
a lack of information and awareness about waste reduction and
recycling.   There are also the difficult problems of
individual selfishness and laziness I have already
mentioned.  
    A United States pilot study has shown that much more
waste can be recycled than is done currently.   New
Zealand 's waste recycling record is nothing to be proud of
in comparison to Japan, for example, which recycles 50
percent of its waste.  
    Barry Commoner of New York 's City University
carried out a study to get the most out of people 's garbage.
  He showed that you can recycle 84 percent of people 's
rubbish.   The people involved in the study kept three
different containers in their homes - one for food scraps,
another for recyclable paper, cans and bottles, and a third
container for non-recyclables - and the containers were
picked up by trucks with separate compartments.   The food
scraps were taken to a composting plant, and the other
products recycled.  
      Rubbish Mountain    
    In the United States, and other countries running
out of landfill space, such an approach might have to be
compulsory in the years to come.   In 15
    year 's      years'       time when a New
York landfill site is full, it will be the highest point on
the eastern seaboard between Maine and Florida!  
    Even if we became a far less wasteful society there
will inevitably still be wastes that will need to be
landfilled.   There are very good public health reasons for
removing refuse away from people in a clean efficient
manner and landfills should be recognised as very useful
amenities.  
    Landfilling of refuse which cannot be reused can
be regarded as a type of recycling in itself.   Proper
selection and management of landfill sites and proper planning
for the use of completed sites can result in conversion of
poor quality land (not wetlands or important shrublands!) into
useful land and facilities.   Former landfill sites can be
used as parks and industrial land, and lead the way into the
development of residential land.  
    It has been interesting to note that as the standard
of landfill management has improved so that these
facilities have been changed from dumps to landfills, the
opposition to their construction has increased rather than
decreased.   This is not surprising if one considers the
past record of the old dumps.  
    Landfills require close control of leachate, litter,
and fires.   They must be carefully operated with good
cover and tight control of the tipface, and they should be
well-screened from view.   Access roads to the landfill
should be kept clean.   There is now a new imperative on
landfills for control of landfill gas.   This gas can be
dangerous and cause explosions, and methane, its main
constituent, is a very serious contributor to the greenhouse
effect.   The gas can also smell and be toxic.  
    Most people accept the need for landfills,
particularly if everything has been done to reduce and
reuse the wastes prior to landfilling, but no one seems to
want these facilities anywhere near them.   The only way
around such attitudes is for the operators of these facilities
to improve their records and demonstrate to the public that
the landfills can be run without causing nuisances and
environmental degradation.  
      Hazardous Wastes    
    Another matter which needs urgent attention is the
disposal of hazardous waste.   Over the last few decades the
chemical industry has thrived, producing a whole range of
products which have become eagerly accepted by our consumer
society.   Many of these products are very useful and
contribute much to our present standard of living.
  Many others may be of doubtful use.   The production of
hazardous waste is a problem that has crept up almost
unsuspectingly on this thriving industry.   Disposal of
these wastes and the clean-up of contaminated sites are now
presenting enormous and costly difficulties and much
environmental degradation has occurred.   In New Zealand the
amounts of hazardous waste being generated are not large, but
they present some difficult disposal problems and these wastes
are not generally being properly managed.   The main types
of industry which produce hazardous waste in New Zealand are
the timber treatment, metal finishing, chemical processing,
tanning, and petroleum/oil industries.   These and other
industries produce a wide range of wastes, including heavy
metals (for example arsenic, chromium, cadmium), acids and
bases, cyanides, pesticide wastes, phenols and other
organic substances such as PCBs.  
    In Auckland the degradation of the Manukau Harbour
with contaminants such as the pesticide chlordane, and
contamination of sites in Penrose and Onehunga and
elsewhere has focused attention on the problems of
hazardous waste disposal.   There are around 2500 industries
in the Manukau catchment.   160 of these have been required
to upgrade their work practices or facilities to prevent
pollution.  
    Controls to deal with hazardous waste could take the
form of licensing disposal sites, a manifest system for
transport of hazardous wastes to ensure such wastes do not
get "lost" en route, strong penalties for unsatisfactory
disposal, and an effective programme for notifying and
cleaning up contaminated sites.   Clear guidelines and a
good advisory service are also needed.   The Government has
decided to set up a Hazards Control Commission to manage
hazardous chemicals and other hazardous substances such as
genetically modified organisms.  
  diagrams  
  photos  
  captions  
      Action Needed    
    If our ever-diminishing resources are to be conserved
and serious pollution of our environment avoided, then
much more satisfactory management of our waste is needed.
  We need firstly to look at ourselves and curb our own
untidy and wasteful habits and the consumer drive which is
behind such wastefulness.   There must be more to life than
shopping!   We must then look to our political leaders to
give some clear direction for sound waste management, with
some practical initiatives which encourage maximum waste
reduction and reuse, with environmentally sound disposal of
wastes that cannot be reused.  
    Local authorities are in a good position to start
waste reduction and recycling programmes.   A catchy
name for a programme that has been successfully tried overseas
is the "4R Programme" - reduction, recycling, reuse, recovery.
  This would involve: 
&bullet;   Careful analysis of the waste stream to
understand where reduction and reuse can be best
practised.
&bullet;   Careful and hard examination of ways to
reduce waste.
&bullet;   Identifying, publicising and promoting
recycling opportunities.
&bullet;   Promotion and establishment of collection
systems.
&bullet;   Examination of "separation at source
methods", with door-to-door collection of different
recyclables.
&bullet;   Promotion of "waste reduction at source" in
industry through such methods as better housekeeping, process
modification and internal recycling.
&bullet;   Provision of assistance to recycling
industries.
&bullet;   Setting up recycling centres.
&bullet;   Establishing well-managed recycling at
landfills with appropriate receptacles which are clearly
marked.
&bullet;   Setting up programmes in schools both for
education and fundraising reasons.
&bullet;   Production of a recycling handbook which is
updated regularly.
&bullet;   Establishment of a regional waste exchange.
&bullet;   Giving awards for good waste reduction and
reuse initiatives.
&bullet;   Ensuring the region 's local authorities and
the regional authority reduce and recycle their own wastes
responsibly.
&bullet;   Lobbying central government to take much
needed national initiatives such as the imposition of
product charges, and mandatory deposits where appropriate, the
provision of carefully-targeted subsidies and grants, and
provision of advice and encouragement.  
    Only those wastes that cannot be dealt with by the 4Rs
should then be sent for disposal.   This disposal should
be carried out in an environmentally sound fashion.    
  

          Territories      
    Kiwis are territorial birds.   Until recently it was
thought that the male bird staked out the territory and stuck
to it, and the female was attached to him.   It now appears
that females are also capable of holding territories.   In
any border confrontation, however, the male bird of a pair is
more likely to be the combatant than the female.   Recent
studies have shown that brown kiwi territories may
overlap.  
    Territories can vary a lot in size.   On Kapiti
Island, little spotted kiwis are packed into territories about
2ha in area - high-density living.   On the other hand, the
great spotted kiwis of North-west Nelson occupy territories up
to 30ha in area, and the brown kiwis of Hawkes Bay have
established territories as big as 40ha, a huge area for a
flightless bird to patrol, equivalent to about 60 soccer
fields.
  photo  
  caption   
  Kiwis do not avoid steep terrain when establishing their
territories.   They are cross-country specialists, with legs
and feet to handle just about any terrain.   Their claws
serve as crampons, and a short hind toe must be an asset for
descending steep slopes.  
        Burrows      
    A kiwi 's territory is dotted with burrows and shelters
that are used, of course, during daylight hours.   Burrows
are often dug into the earth in the vicinity of a tree 's
roots, which promises easier digging, but they may also be
found in the base of a decaying tree or in the rotted centre
of a fallen log.  
    Kiwis do not climb trees.   They fashion shelters
for roosting at the base of clumps of tall grass or sedge
(typically toetoe and gahnia), fern, bracken, and tussock.
  A thick pile of leaf litter, even radiata pine needles,
may serve as well or a crevice in a jumble of moss-laden rocks
on a stream bank.  
    Great spotted kiwis prefer dens with more than one
entrance/exit.   To achieve this they sometimes construct a
network of tunnels several metres long.   Little spotted
kiwis, on the other hand, invariably occupy burrows with a
single entrance.   The burrows of all species are
surprisingly small yet kiwis manage to squeeze inside them
without undue loss of feathers.   It has been suggested that
in the squeeze the kiwi divests itself of excess water in its
feathers should they be wet.   Certainly a narrow entrance
would help keep the interior warm and dark, and it would
attract less attention.  
    While digging a burrow, the kiwi puts its bill over
its shoulder to get it out of the way, and works its legs and
feet as on a treadmill - but fast.   The dirt flies, and
burrows are built in remarkably short time.  
    The standard burrow is between one and three metres
long, with a chamber at the end large enough for two birds to
sleep side by side.   Bonded birds do not always sleep
together.   Little spotted kiwi pairs sleep together about
50 per cent of the time.  
    When it comes to their accommodation kiwis are thought
to be opportunistic, using vegetation to shelter in where it
is available in the right form and digging burrows when it is
not.   They rotate their use of burrows and shelters.
  Great spotted and brown kiwis seldom use the same one on
consecutive nights, which means they maintain a widespread
presence.   It may pay to advertise.   Intruders may be
discouraged by a high profile, for kiwis leave strong-smelling
faeces where they go, and the birds themselves throw off a
distinctive odour that probably lingers for a few days, if not
for weeks.   It is variously described as earthy (not
surprisingly for a ground-dwelling creature), sweetly musty,
and acrid.  
        Voice      
    From the number and dispersion of their burrows and
shelters, kiwis evidently are on intimate terms with their
territories, although the boundaries are not obvious to the
human eye.   In addition to the intensive foot patrols, it
appears they maintain territorial integrity by calling.
  They also call to keep in touch with their mate.  
    As discussed earlier, kiwis utter a shrill whistle
about two seconds long, repeated up to 20 times.   Males
strike a higher note, which in the case of South Island brown
kiwis rises until right at the end when it abruptly descends.
  The female call is hoarser and it also falls off at the
end.   Little and great spotted kiwis inject a trill or roll
into their call, which rises all the way - 'Crrrruick!'
  The trill is less pronounced in little spotted kiwis.  
    The voice of the kiwi, which the untrained ear may
confuse with that of the weka, is among the loudest in the
forest.   Kiwi calls can carry 200 metres through a dense
subcanopy on a still night and across at least 500 metres of
open country.   Calls are made any time between dusk and
dawn, although they tend to be concentrated in the first few
hours of darkness.   Moonlight seems to inhibit calling, as
does a strong wind.  
    Males call up to three times more often than females,
but it is common for a bonded pair to deliver a duet.   In
the mating season, understandably, kiwis are more vocal.
  In close contact, kiwis may exchange softer, grunted calls
that are thought to be associated with pair reinforcement or
even courtship.  
    Over the years kiwi experts have had fun describing
the various kiwi calls.   Richard Henry, the Resolution
Island ranger, likened the South Island brown kiwi 's call to a
  'high-pitched rather musical scream, with a tremble
and a sudden drop of several notes at the end of each call,
which may be about two seconds duration, repeated five or six
times'  .   Henry thought the call of the little
spotted kiwi was   'just like a guard 's whistle on the
train repeated several times'  .   It was, he said,
  'on the same general plan as the Great Spotted Kiwi,
but very different voices'  .   How different is a
matter of conjecture.   Calls attributed to little spotted
kiwis in the Paparoa Range of the West Coast a few years ago
turned out to be coming from great spotted kiwis.   Brown
kiwi calls are also fairly similar, but distinguishable to the
educated ear.    
    When calling, the kiwi often tips back its head so the
bill is at a slight angle.   At the end of each call brown
kiwis have the habit of dipping the bill suddenly - a rapid
bow.  
    Young kiwis do not attempt the adult call until at
least a year old (perhaps they do not wish to buy a fight with
the territory holder).   The juvenile call is often thin and
punctuated, reminiscent, as one researcher put it, of the
human voice breaking.   As chicks, kiwis have been heard
uttering a chuckle (  '... not unlike that of a
brood-hen when disturbed on her nest,'   said Buller) or
a clicking sound.  
    In addition to their hallmark call kiwis can utter
growling or hissing sounds when alarmed or aggressive.
  Also, they may snap their mandibles to produce a loud
crack.   But the most common sound they make is not strictly
vocal.   It is a loud snuffling that is made when they expel
air forcefully through their nostrils.   This sound is
associated with the kiwi 's specialist sense - smell.  
        Senses      
    The best-known and most spectacular feature of the
kiwi 's physical make-up is its bill, which attains its
greatest length in the female of the Stewart Island brown kiwi
(recorded as long as 20cm, a third of the bird 's overall
length, but more likely to be 16-18cm).  
    The bill is a sensory masterpiece, enabling the kiwi
to locate its food both by   smell   and by touch.
  In the brown kiwis and great spotteds the bill is curved
downward slightly&semi; in little spotted kiwis it is more or less
straight.  
    No other bird in the world is known to have nostrils
at the end of its beak.   Through this adaptation the kiwi
stalks small invertebrate animals as far below the surface as
its bill will reach.   It can bury the bill to the hilt and
still be sniffing, although there are nasal valves present to
prevent soil entering.  
  photo  
  caption  
    The kiwi is among a handful of birds in the world that
depend on the sense of smell to locate food.   In most birds
the sense of smell is considered to be poorly developed, but
the olfactory lobes in the kiwi 's head, which control the
sense of smell, are unusually well developed.  
    In experiments involving a series of dishes, some with
food buried, others without, the kiwi went for the food every
time and all but ignored the soil that contained none.
  These experiments were conducted by an American scientist,
Bernice Wenzel, who reported,   'The   birds'  
performance in the tests of ability to locate food was
completely convincing.'    
    Captive kiwis have been known to refuse to eat their
daily ration if prepared by other than their usual keeper.  
    The bill is undoubtedly as useful an instrument of
  touch   as of smell to the kiwi, which uses it
incessantly to poke and probe in an arc in front of it.
  Said Walter Buller:
      That the sense of touch is highly developed
seems quite certain, because the bird, although it may not be
audibly sniffing, will always first touch an object with the
point of its bill, whether in the act of feeding or of
surveying the ground&semi; and when shut up in a cage or confined
in a room it may be heard, all through the night, tapping
softly at the walls.      
    The whiskers or bristles projecting from the base of
the bill and the forehead are also considered highly sensitive
to touch, helping the bird with its short-range navigation in
the dark and, perhaps, regulating the thrust of the bill while
probing for food.   In the North Island brown kiwi the
whiskers reach out almost as far as the bill.  
    There is the view that kiwis can also feel through
their fluffed-out feathers, which they keep in good condition
by applying oil from the uropygial (preen) gland above the
tail area.   They collect this oil by rubbing their bill up
and down on their nether regions.   In addition to keeping
the feathers glossy and water-proof, the oil is also thought
to be a tonic for the bill.  
    The kiwi 's sense of   hearing   is reckoned to
bc acute.   In all species and sub-species the ear openings
are prominent.   When the kiwi is searching for food it not
only sniffs - it listens as well.   It has been observed
cocking its head while standing perfectly still in the manner
of a blackbird or thrush that is listening out for worms
moving under the ground.  
  photo  
  caption  
    Large ear openings, small eyes: the kiwi 's poor
  eyesight   is legendary, 'like a blind person creeping
about with a bill for a walking stick' is a familiar analogy.
  For its body size the kiwi has small, beady eyes as black
as the forest floor on a moonless night.  
    Logic suggests that the kiwi is compensated for its
poor sight by its powers of smell, touch, and hearing.
  Certainly it does not depend on good vision to feed.
  But in respect of its eyesight the kiwi has had a 'bad
press' over the years.   A pamphlet about the bird,
published in 1951 by the American Kiwi Polish Company,
declared with conviction,   'This completely illogical
bird can see only six feet at night and by daylight much, much
less ... only two feet in front of his elongated
bill.'    
    These days experienced field observers do not believe
the kiwi suffers from an extreme case of myopia.   Even in
the daylight when the bird is supposed to be virtually blind
it will negotiate its way through dense forest at a fast clip
without crashing into anything.   Only in a state of (blind)
panic is the bird liable to hit obstacles.   Disturbed, a
kiwi can run directly to another shelter 100 metres away.
  It knows where it is going.  
    Far from being fazed by daylight, the Stewart Island
brown kiwi is active after daybreak and can be seen feeding in
tussock grasslands and other open country on overcast days.
  But it is the odd one out.   The other four kiwis hide
during the day.   Typically, they emerge from their burrows
and shelters shortly after nightfall, and are active
throughout the night.   Sometimes their last calls mingle
with the  'dawn chorus' of diurnal songbirds.  
    The fifth sense is that of   taste  .   By and
large the kiwi is omnivorous, and its feeding habits deserve
to be examined under a new heading.  
        Feeding      
    Kiwis come out at night to feed, equipped, as one
early writer put it, with their   'combination nose and
worm spear'  .   Worms are indeed a major item in
their diet, and in New Zealand, kiwis have a huge range to
choose from - 178 native species and 14 introduced kinds.
  In capturing worms, kiwis display uncommon dexterity.
  Walter Buller was thoroughly impressed.     'It is
amazing to observe,'   he wrote,   'the extreme
care and deliberation with which the bird draws the worm from
its hiding place, coaxing it out as it were by degrees,
instead of pulling or roughly breaking it.'    
    When searching for food the kiwi is highly mobile,
almost impatient, tapping the ground with its bill and using
its formidable legs and feet, well endowed with claws, to
negotiate the steepest, roughest terrain.  
    Sensing prey, or perhaps detecting an animal 's tunnel,
the kiwi will drive its bill into the earth, right up to the
hilt if necessary.   The tip of the upper mandible overlaps
the lower one, protecting the opening as the bill is pushed
through the soil.   A single probe may not be enough&semi; the
bill may have to go into action as a lever and create a wider
opening in the soil in the shape of a funnel in order to
deepen the search.   Sometimes a kiwi will use its entire
weight to drive the bill deeper by kicking up its legs - a
kiwi 'hand-stand'.  
    H. R. Haeusler, in 1923, amplified Buller 's
description of the kiwi worm-catcher, in this case a North
Island brown:
      When it had formed a funnel-like depression it
inserted its bill and took a good hold for the worm.   With
a steady pull it often succeeded in bringing its victim to the
surface.   When it was not able to do so it ceased pulling,
as to continue to do so would have resulted in tearing the
worm and losing the greater part, and leaning well back
remained in the same position, waiting without the faintest
movement of any part of its body, until the worm, tired out by
its exertion, momentarily relaxed its hold.   Then with
another steady pull generally drew it out of its
burrow.      
  photo  
  caption  
  photo  
  caption  
    Of the foraging habits of the Stewart Island brown
kiwi, H. Guthrie-Smith wrote in 1914:
      I noticed that when looking for them [worms]
on the ground his bill was carried an inch or so above the
litter, and used to feel softly and explore the peat, just as
a blind man uses his staff slantingly to poke and probe the
ground immediately in front of him.      
    William Yate   (An Account of New Zealand,  
1835) advanced the idea that a kiwi could locate worms by
stamping its feet.   He wrote,   'It makes a kind of
hissing noise when in search of prey&semi; and strikes the ground
with its strong heavy feet, to rouse the earth-worms and put
them in motion.'     Buller dismissed the idea as
  'fanciful'  .  
    The preponderance of invertebrates in the kiwi 's diet
probably saves it from needing to drink water too often -
worms and beetle larvae are 85 per cent water.   When it
does drink it immerses its bill and tips back its head,
creating a gurgling sound.  
    Kiwis, primarily carnivorous, eat a wide variety of
small invertebrates including woodlice (slaters), centipedes,
millipedes, slugs, snails, spiders, and various insects.
  Among the insects taken are cicada nymphs, crickets,
wetas, and ants.   The caterpillars and pupae of moths and
larvae and adults of various beetles, especially chafer
beetles, are also favourite prey.  
    Berries and seeds contribute to the diet.   Species
include hinau   (Elaeocarpus dentatus),   miro
  (Prumnopitys ferruginea),   gahnia, and various kinds
of coprosma and hebe.   Miro berries, favourite food of
native pigeons (kereru), smell strongly of turpentine.
  Some leaves are also ingested.   Wildlife Service
scientist Brian Reid, in 1970, concluded that some vegetable
matter was essential for the kiwi 's long-term wellbeing.  
    In Dusky Sound around the turn of the century Richard
Henry noticed that the stomachs of some South Island brown
kiwis that his dog had accidentally killed (the dog lost its
muzzle) were   'full of miro berries, the hard stones of
which they completely digest, probably for the sake of the
little oily kernels'  .   These birds were in good
condition.  
    North Island brown kiwis in Waitangi State Forest
consume bracket fungi and occasionally frogs in addition to
the more common items.   Some of the insects eaten by kiwis
produce repellant secretions and odours unpleasant to the
human nose, but not, it would seem, to the kiwi sense of
smell.   On the contrary, the odours might even help the
kiwi locate the prey.   Waitangi Forest kiwis are partial to
the native black cockroach, kekerengu, which emits an
'objectionable' smell.  
    Freshwater lobsters, measuring about 10cm in length,
are available to kiwis in some areas.   These lobsters live
in streams but are known to climb on to stream banks during
floods when they are liable to be found by kiwis.   Yet
kiwis are thought to 'fish' for prey, and lobsters may be
among the prey species.   Richard Henry guessed that kiwis
found insects and other food in   'puddles and
waterholes'  .   He must have known also that kiwis
can wade - or even swim - across streams and small rivers.  
    Great spotted kiwis in the Saxon River area of
North-west Nelson regularly cross the river, which is the size
of a large, swift stream in this upland zone, to reach feeding
grounds on the red tussock flats insinuating the beech forest,
even when the river is swollen.   These roas seem to feed in
the tussock in winter more often than in summer.   Winter is
the season for beetle and porina moth larvae, which may
explain their greater use of the tussock in that season.  
    On Kapiti Island the diet of the little spotted kiwi
has been closely studied.   Its commonest foods are
earthworms, cranefly larvae and pupae, grass grub beetle
larvae, caterpillars, and spiders.   Plant material in this
kiwi 's diet includes the fruit of hinau, toro   (Myrsine
salicina),   and pigeonwood   (Hedycarya arborea)  
trees.   Grass seed and fern sporangia are also eaten or
accidentally ingested.  
    In addition to using its bill to tap and probe the
ground, this smallest kiwi pushes it obliquely through the
leaf litter somewhat after the style of a duck sifting muddy
vegetation.   Kiwi gizzards usually contain amounts of grit
and small pebbles as digestive aids.   The pebbles can range
in size up to 10mm.  
    The condition of the soil is an important factor in
feeding.   Dry spells produce hard soils, hard going for a
probing bill&semi; a moist climate produces the opposite effect,
hence the kiwi 's interest in rainforest.  
    Until recently it was thought that kiwis were
opportunistic feeders, that they were grateful for what they
could find.   Kapiti Island studies, comparing food
availability to what the kiwis actually eat, are pointing to
another conclusion: that the little spotted kiwi, for one, is
a selective feeder.   It is noticeable, for example, that
these birds do not eat the share of millipedes available to
them.  
    All in all, it is difficult to identify a 'typical'
kiwi diet if only because the birds occupy a very wide habitat
range.   To confuse the picture, captive kiwis prosper on
foods unavailable to them in the wild (see Chapter 8).  
    Feeding and breeding are related.   Kiwis must build
up reserves to get through the breeding season.    
  

        The Unhappy Huka      
  summary  
      H  uka Falls - what New Zealander hasn't
heard of this spectacular waterfall?   The life blood of the
Huka Falls is the water - quantity and quality - that combined
give the cascade which over 500,000 tourists come to see each
year.   The Huka Falls personify the image of unspoilt New
Zealand, with cascades of clear, blue water tumbling into a
haze of swirling white foam.  
    How deep does this image go?   How clean is the
water, how clean should it be?   It would surprise most to
know that treated sewage is discharged a few kilometres
upstream of the falls.
  photo  
  caption  
  Police divers working beneath the falls in 1989
suffered gastric infections.  
    The Taupo Borough Pollution Control Plant (TB-PCP)
discharges secondarily treated sewage into the Waikato River 1
km downstream of the Lake Taupo outlet, about 5 km upstream of
the Huka Falls.  
    Sewage disposal from Taupo prior to the mid 1970s
relied on the use of septic tanks.   Groundwater beneath the
Taupo township had been contaminated by septic tank effluent,
causing increased weed growth and algal slimes in Lake Taupo.
  These nuisance growths added to the impetus to provide the
growing township with a more acceptable means of sewage
disposal.  
    The first stage of the currently existing TB-PCP was
commissioned in 1975 with a discharge permit issued by the
National Pollution Advisory Council.   In the mid 1980s,
reticulation of Taupo was nearly completed, and it became
necessary to increase the plant 's capacity to cope with loads.
  Extensions were completed in 1987 and a five-year water
right was issued by the then Waikato Valley Authority.  
    Sewage is secondarily treated using two high-rate
trickle filters containing stone media, and passes through a
final clarifier before being discharged to the river.   In
perspective, this treatment process is one of the more
advanced in operation in New Zealand, particularly if you
compare it with sewage disposal in our capital city, among
others.  
    So, what happens to the Upper Waikato River when you
discharge treated sewage?  
    The Waikato Valley Authority-Waikato Catchment Board
(now the Waikato Regional Council) has monitored the river for
the duration of the TB-PCP discharge.   Monitoring has
shown that there is little significant change in all water
quality variables between the Lake Taupo outlet and the Huka
Falls, with the exception of bacterial and certain nutrient
components.   The TB-PCP discharge is mostly responsible for
the observed increases, with groundwater and tributary inflows
contributing minor loads.  
    Faecal indicator bacteria increase from near zero at
the Lake Taupo outlet to levels at times above current
criteria for recreational freshwater downstream of the TB-PCP
discharge.   People swim and canoe below the discharge and
the river is used as a water supply for campers.  
    Water leaving Lake Taupo is clear and low in
nutrients - 'oligotrophic', to be exact.   Phosphorus
(P) and nitrogen (N) nutrients are vital to aquatic plant
growth.   Upstream of the discharge P and N sources are
dominated by forms that are largely unavailable for use by
plants.   The TB-PCP discharge is responsible for
increase in available forms of both N and P in the form of
ammonia and phosphate.   About 60 percent of the total
loads of both ammonia and phosphate to the Upper Waikato
River are attributable to the TB-PCP discharge.  
    However, because the river massively dilutes the
effluent, the mean increase in both phosphate and ammonia does
not appear so great&semi; from a mean of 0.6 mg/m  3  
phosphate above to 2.8 mg/m  3       below the
    TB/PCP    TB-PCP     discharge and from 4.1
mg/m  3   ammonia above to 12.0 mg/m  3   below
the TB-PCP discharge.  
    Not huge increases for the river 's plant life to cope
with, you might think.   But plants are primary producers,
and impacts on plants are passed on through the food chain.
  What do these increases mean to river life in
    th    the     Upper Waikato River?  
    Although the water quality of both the effluent and
receiving water was monitored, the biological impact of this
discharge to the Waikato River was not addressed until 1988,
thirteen years after commissioning the discharge.   This is
not unique for discharge impact.   In
  photo  
  caption  
fact, the effects on in situ plant life have seldom been
considered for any discharge into waterways.  
    Conceptually, assessing the biological impact of this
discharge is quite simple.   Plants and animals growing
attached to the riverbed are good indicators of
environmental conditions over time.   By comparing
assemblages present in similar physical habitats both above
and below the discharge, we can assess what changes have come
about as a result of adding effluent to the water.  
    Carrying this concept out in a meaningful and
quantifiable manner is not so simple.   The fast-flowing
Upper Waikato River is on average three to four metres deep,
and can reach 16 metres.  
    Under contract to the Waikato Regional Council, Dr
Brian Coffey and I trialled a rather novel technique: a boat
is used to lay a chain out     acros    across    
the riverbed, the chain is attached to anchors fixed into
either riverbank.   A harnessed scuba diver moves across the
'transit chain' collecting samples and recording data at fixed
intervals.  
    The chain is retrieved after each transect, and the
process repeated elsewhere on the river in relation to
discharge and tributary inflow.   In this manner a
quantifiable picture of the riverbed is built up.
  Transects can be repeated to assess changes in discharge
regimes.  
    These investigations revealed a dramatic change in
plant communities downstream of the TB-PCP discharge with
proliferation of pollution-indicating algae -
  Enteromorpha nana   and   Cladophora
glomerata  .   Growths of these algae smothered and
displaced other aquatic vegetation, significantly
degrading the waterway.  
    But what were these algae responding to?  
    The proliferating algae were supported by the increase
in available N and P nutrients.   The concentration
increases may appear small, but a critical boundary had been
traversed for aquatic plant growth.   But what was
primarily causal - the N or the P increase, or both?  
    Algae growing downstream of the TB-PCP inflow were
transplanted above this discharge and their N and P
responses monitored.   These transplants above the
discharge became nitrogen-deficient, with phosphorus nutrient
supply remaining in excess for algal growth.   This
indicates that the increase in N nutrients from the discharge
is the most likely cause of algal proliferations.  
    This contrasts strongly with overseas studies which
show that P sources are almost
    aways    always     the main cause of these
kinds of changes.   In the Great Lakes, for example, P
increase has been identified as the main cause of
  Cladophora   proliferation.   Phosphorus stripping
has been used with varying levels of success to lessen these
impacts, and has been talked of for the Upper Waikato River.
  As P nutrients were in excess for algal growth even above
the discharge, stripping phosphorus from the effluent is
unlikely to reduce algal growth.   And because the
increase in nutrient concentrations is in any case relatively
small, any nutrient stripping technique used would need to be
very finely tuned - maybe over 90 percent effective.  
    In essence, it appears that the Upper Waikato River is
extremely sensitive to changes in nutrient regimes.
  Discharging secondarily treated sewage into the river,
therefore, is not compatible with maintaining downstream water
quality.  
    Speaking of downstream values, modelling work
carried out in this study concluded that the Upper Waikato
River was a 'transporter' rather than a 'processor' of the
effluent.   Most of the nutrient load from the TB-PCP
discharge ends up downstream of the Huka Falls, where its
impact has not been addressed.  
    This story may have a happy ending.   The work
described here forms part of the draft Upper Waikato River
Management Plan, formulated by the Waikato Regional Council.
  This plan recognises the value of diversion of the TB-PCP
discharge to land-based treatment.   It is open for public
comment until October.   So what do you think the end of the
story should be?  
    And how many other stories need to be told for
discharges into New Zealand 's waterways?    
          Giardia - One Swallow Could Make Your
Summer      
  summary  
      H  alf a million New Zealanders may be at
risk from the nasty protozoal parasite called giardia,
according to a recent Health Department review.   This
does not mean they will necessarily catch giardiasis, the
unpleasant gastrointestinal disease caused by the giardia
protozoa.   Rather, it is a 'high' estimate of the number of
people who draw drinking water from upland catchments,
rivers, streams, shallow
  photo  
  caption  
wells, springs, lakes and roofs.  
    Chlorination alone, at least as it is used in many New
Zealand water supplies, will not kill giardia, the review
says.   Higher doses of chlorine and longer contact, backed
by good system inspection and monitoring, are effective
but can result in unpleasant tastes.  
    Recent surveys have identified giardia in more than 12
water supplies, including Oamaru, Kakanui, the townships of
Tikorangi and Urenui in northern Taranaki, and in the Hutt
River and head-waters of Wellington 's supply area.
  Department of Conservation recreation officer Jeff Ainge
says that testing in national and forest parks has confirmed
the presence of giardia in several high-use areas, such as
Abel Tasman National Park.  
    However, he says, New Zealand did not have the ability
to test for giardia in waterways until about two years ago,
and its presence in rivers and streams is nothing new.
    "And we don't know whether the incidence or
concentration is increasing or not,"   he adds.  
    No one knows how many cases of giardiasis there are in
New Zealand.   An estimate was made for the first time in
1990 by the New Zealand Communicable Disease Centre in
Porirua.   By surveying medical laboratories, they came up
with the figure of 3356 cases.  
    However, centre research assistant Natalie Walker says
that figure is certain to be a significant underestimate,
because the disease is not notifiable and many people might
not have acute enough symptoms to go to the doctor.
  Although there have been no major outbreaks such as
occurred in Aspen, Colorado in 1965,   "we have no idea
how many more cases there are.     We can't even say if
it 's increasing because we 've only been looking for it for a
couple of years.  "    
    Department of Health environmental scientist Chris
Shaw, co-author of the review, says there is no need for
panic, although care needs to be taken.     "  We
have to assume that all waterways, including source waters
for community water supplies, are at risk.   However,
giardia has almost certainly been here for some time.   It
was just that 25 years ago people didn't look for
it."      
    Professor Tim Brown, in charge of giardia research at
Massey University, was quoted last year as saying that concern
about giardia borders on paranoia.   He compared the concern
to publicity several years ago about his research into
amoebic meningitis in hot pools.     "  We were
closing pools because it actually kills, but people still
climbed over the fences for a swim.   Mention giardia, which
is not life-threatening, and everyone is
paranoid."      
    Although water-borne infection is the main source of
the disease in many countries, Chris Shaw says that in New
Zealand person-to-person contact is probably more
important.   Around a third of the 3356 cases estimated
in the survey came from the Auckland area, where there is full
water treatment which removes giardia.     "  We
have to ask: are people going out of the area and catching it
or is it person-to-person infection based on poor hygiene?
    "  Beavers have it in the USA - it is called
'beaver fever' there - and they live and defecate in the
water.   In New Zealand faeces containing cysts have to be
washed into the water (although rats may defecate in water),
so the risks of water-borne infection are less here than in
the USA or Canada."       It has been estimated
that a minimum of 10 cysts are needed to infect a person, and
some stream water tested in New Zealand showed around 10 cysts
per 100 litres.     "Therefore you 'd be unlucky to
catch it by drinking water in the bush,"   Shaw
said.  
    The New Plymouth District Council recently issued
warnings for people to boil their drinking water after giardia
was found in the Tikorangi school drinking-water system and in
the Urenui water supply.   Council public health engineer
Anthony Wilson said the warnings were precautions only.
    "  Tikorangi seemed odd in that it was a
groundwater supply, which you wouldn't expect to be
  diagram  
contaminated.   In fact we found the contamination was
coming from possum droppings on top of the school tank.   In
Urenui there was a very old water supply system that came to
us after local body amalgamation.   It was not running
properly and the local people were complaining about the
water.   We found just one cyst there and tests since have
all been negative."      
    Anthony Wilson points out a problem with testing water
for giardia is that the tests indicate the presence of cysts
but not whether they are dead or alive.   Equally, because
giardia does not breed in water, a lack of cysts does not
necessarily mean giardia is not present.  
    Cysts have also been found in low numbers in catchment
streams above Wellington 's water supply.   However,
Wellington Regional Council laboratory manager Helen
Sillars says Wellington 's water treatment removes giardia
cysts.   Giardia cysts are also known to be in the lower
Hutt River, which she says is probably related to a small
sewerage plant near Trentham.   Giardia has been found in
sewerage plants overseas, and most are likely to have giardia
in their effluent.  
    Giardiasis was first detected in New Zealand among
servicemen returning from overseas in the 1940s.   Whether
it spread from this introduction or was here before is
unknown.   As more New Zealanders have travelled
overseas, many may have encountered the disease and
brought it back as a souvenir.   As more people from here
and abroad go into the outdoors, there is also greater
pressure on limited outdoor toilets, perhaps contaminating
drinking water.  
      Very little is known about giardia in New Zealand,
although Chris Shaw says the best bet is that people have been
catching it for decades.   Studies funded by the Health
Department last year have isolated   Giardia lamblia  ,
the giardia species which infects humans, and produced
giardia cysts   in vitro  , both essential for
improving water testing.   Other studies implicate household
pets: 25 percent of dogs and seven percent of cats tested in
Hamilton were 
  box  
carrying strains which could infect humans.   Giardia was
found in possums, rats, sheep, cows and hens, though in
numbers too small to be statistically significant.  
    The Massey University department of microbiology and
genetics recently started a three-year project in the
Manawatu-Wanganui Area Health Board district, again funded by
the Health Department, to get hard data on giardia and
giardiasis.   The study will monitor waterways, check farm,
domestic and wild animals for cysts, develop better human
testing procedures, and survey a target human population for
giardia infections.  
      A  nother pathogenic protozoa,
  Cryptosporidium  , may turn out to be a greater public
health risk than giardia.   In a recent article Dr Martin
Tobias, manager of the New Zealand Communicable Disease
Centre, said it may be more prevalent here than was
thought, and it appears to be high in farm and possibly feral
animals.     "As it is self-limiting and generally
mild, the absence of any effective treatment for
cryptosporidiosis is not a major concern in the
immunocompetent person.   The same is not true in the
immunocompromised (particularly persons with Aids),
however, in whom the disease is often fatal."    
    The New Zealand standards for drinking water are based
on World Health Organisation water quality guidelines,
under which pathogenic protozoa such as giardia should not be
present.   The Health Department review suggests a rough
estimate of the cost of upgrading water-treatment plants in
New Zealand to remove giardia - and cryptosporidium - is
$60-$100m.   The Government is unlikely to welcome
popular demand for upgraded water supplies at this time of
national penny-pinching, and a gradual improvement is probably
the best hope.   Since the risk of developing giardiasis
from drinking water in most situations is small, the upgrading
need only be gradual.  
    Trampers, hunters and other users of the outdoors
should be aware of the problem and use toilets where available
to prevent spread of giardia.   Otherwise they should do
what Scouts and Guides have always done - choose a spot well
away from water, walking tracks and possible campsites, dig a
shallow hole and refill with soil after use.   Some trampers
carry filters now.   Many soldier on, swearing they 'll drink
the water until they get sick.  
    Chris Shaw says the spread of giardia is an
unfortunate fact of life in New Zealand in the latter part of
the 20th century.     "In the UK no one would dream of
drinking out of a river.   You know there would be a dead
animal or something like it just around the corner.   Sadly,
New Zealand is just catching up with the rest of the
world."       