  INTRODUCTION 

   'To articulate the past historically does not mean to recognize it 'the way it really was' ....  It means to seize hold of a memory as it flashes up at a moment of danger.'  Walter Benjamin, 'Theses on the Philosophy of History', VI, 255 

 'We are confined to ways of describing whatever is described.  Our universe ... consists of these ways rather than of a world or of worlds.'  Nelson Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking, 2-3 

   Artists are the mnemonists of culture.  Their work is memory work, both personal and social, both intellectual and material.  I want to introduce the complexity of this thematics of memory and the ways in which I will discuss it in the chapters that follow with two arresting images, the Toronto painter Sheila Ayearst's Three Minutes (1988; Plate 1) and The Unveiling of the Cornucopia: A Mural Fragment from the Room with the Unknown Function in the Villa dei Misteri of the 1984 Miss General Idea Pavilion by General Idea (1982; Plate 2). 

   The left side of Ayearst's diptych reproduces in painstaking detail, and with close attention to seventeenth-century techniques of glazing, Rembrandt's fragmentary Anatomy Lesson of Dr Joan Deijman of 1656, now in the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.  Appended and yet opposed to this visual, art-historical recollection are two memorial texts, one inside the other.  The larger, apparently machine-produced text records with the technical, scientific precision of medical terminology the results of an autopsy.  Embedded in a cup-like form within this account is a smaller, much more personal and emotional homage to the death of a brain: 'The brain did not die at once.  It took those three minutes' - an account that, as we will see, is not Ayearst's, but from which she derives her title.  Both texts float on an indistinct surface that is visually reminiscent of the texture of brain tissue. 

   Even this initial description of Three Minutes reveals the complex layering of Ayearst's memory work.  She has recalled an image from art's history that graphically displays the scientific dismemberment of a cadaver as well as textual references to two other deaths.  The brain - the seat of memory, as we commonly think - is pictured in all three instances.  Yet Ayearst's vision demands that we reconsider this habitual 'mentalist' understanding of memory's location, and indeed our resulting relations with the human beings who are defined by it.  Her version of Rembrandt's painting is not as exact as it might appear: she has accentuated the exposed and excavated body cavity of the dead man, making this space as important both optically and thematically as the brain displayed by the surgeon.  She remembers both body and brain - those elements that the Cartesian science evoked by Rembrandt literally takes apart - and considers the two somatically equal in their ability to remember, to record traces.  On the right side of her work, one putatively objective medical appropriation of the brain and its memory similarily vies with the other text, a text that is also written by a doctor of our time and yet is contained in the 'same' skull cap held by the assistant in 'rembrandt's' image.  Crucially, this small text is inscribed in the body of the larger text.  Ayearst's mnemonic devices thus tie the two sides of her piece together; visually, textually, and metaphorically, they tether the seventeenth century's science to that performed in the present while simultaneously offering subversive alternatives to both practices. 

   The rich intricacies of Ayearst's commentaries on memory, the brain, and science are made possible by memory, but not simply her memory.  She relies on Rembrandt's more traditional reflection on Mantegna's Dead Christ (c. 1480), for example, and of the anatomy lessons he witnessed - as well as the doctors' recollections she quotes - and she also depends on her viewer's memories, which might extend from recognitions of art-historical allusions to reminiscences of personal experiences of death to the nature of medical experimentation and documentation in our society.  What Ayearst initiates - but cannot and does not wish to control strictly - with her evocative image and texts is thus neither simply personal nor completely historical.  Her work suggests the overlapping, mutually defining relationship between our everyday notion of memory as individual and history as somehow collective and objective, History with a capital H.  In redefining memory and history in terms of one another, she makes material what Wittgenstein has called a 'memory-reaction' (343), and this reaction or set of reactions animates both her recollections and those of her viewers in the present. 

   With The Unveiling of the Cornucopia, the artists of General Idea invite 'the public to participate in the archaeology of memory' (40).  We see an ersatz ancient mural complete with all the proper art-historical and archaeological signs of its antiquity: faded colour, often imprecise details, visible traces of damage, and, above all, fragmentation.  The central scene, however, is sufficiently intact to arouse our curiosity and to encourage attempts at reconstruction.  Three anthropomorphic poodles seem to be performing some sort of mystery rite around a form that the title suggests is a cornucopia.  The subtitle of this work alerts us to the artists' art-historical allusion to the famous Dionysiac mystery cult imaged on the walls of the Villa of Mysteries at Pompeii c. 50 BC.  But this quotation - like Ayearst's - is only the beginning of a mnemonic reconstitution of meaning.  In a catalogue text entitled Cornucopia accompanying their 1984 retrospective (itself a 'retrospective' event that was projected in much of their earlier work) the artists of General Idea illuminate a project that uncovers the role of memory in their art and in postmodernism generally, a project that begins (not ends, as in much current art-historical identification or appropriation) with our recognition of their allusion: 
  The amorphous world of meanings and functions has traditionally been articulated through the architectural act of construction.  But the three artists of General Idea have re-introduced destruction into the architectural process.  In their long-term project, the 1984 Miss General Idea Pavilion, ruins are created as quickly as rooms are built.  Accumulated layers of function and meaning slip in and out of focus, creating a shifting constellation of images which is the Pavilion itself. (67)  

   Traditional archaeology is based on the assumption that a stable past, a History, can be recovered, but General Idea mocks this possibility and the desire behind it by literalizing the 'shifting' nature of meaning.  What The Unveiling of the Cornucopia uncovers is General Idea's self-created and well-marketed past, a past that here passes for antiquity by deploying culturally specific signs of history: fragmentation and damage.  All the elements in this large mural were indeed pre-constructed precisely to allow for their partial destruction, their cultural weathering, which in turn permits them to signify pastness in an art-historical framework even though they are not literally old.  We see General Idea's signature poodles, their famous ziggurat forms, the cocktail glass spilling its cultural meanings to the left of the central poodle, and of course the cornucopia itself, which never reveals more than the perpetually plentiful process of construction/ destruction through which memory creates meaning.  This image plays in a very telling way with its supposed antecedent at Pompeii: are we not encouraged by the transformation of the Roman wall painting's supposedly Dionysian women into poodles to question the self-serious assigning of meaning that typifies art history's own appropriation of this and all other 'past' images?  The ludic frequently proclaims memory's work, as we will see throughout this book. 

   I suggested at the outset that Three Minutes and The Unveiling of the Cornucopia introduce the central dimensions of memory that I will explore and through which I will elaborate a theory of postmodernism in recent Canadian art.  With the above descriptions in mind, let me specify this promise.  Both works quote from the history of Western art, and this sort of citation is widely held to typify postmodernist practice.  Against the now-fashionable lament - best articulated by Fredric Jameson - that this purportedly fast and loose play with art's history is nothing more than an empty pastiche, symptomatic of a contemporary loss of historical awareness, however, I want to argue that, in many more instances than those in which Jameson and followers like Terry Eagleton can justify their claims (and both authors can be criticized for the abstractness of their arguments, for their unwillingness to offer examples), art-historical recollections are in fact integral to a new concern for the status of history and the past in art.  In 'Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism' (1984) - an article that has rightly become a touchstone in discussions of postmodernism Jameson bemoans what he sees as postmodernism's 'weakening of historicity, both in our relationship to public History and in the new forms of our private temporality' (58).  This loss of the public and personal past, he claims, restricts an individual's 'capacity actively to extend its pro-tensions and re-tensions across the temporal manifold' (71) - in other words, his or her ability to understand the past and to act in a future extending from it.  Jameson's ultimate regret, then, is for what he sees as a loss of social and political efficacy based on a loss of history.  'It is unsurprising' , he has written more recently, in a tone that many critics of the postmodern have adopted without any attention to its local applicability, '... that most of the postmodernisms will betray the extinction of even the protopolitical in their agreeable ironies and their aesthetic cynicisms, their forced accommodation to the system' ('Postmodernism and Utopia', 13). 

   Jameson deploys his arguments about the loss of history in exactly the three areas in which I focalize memory: art's past (his claims about pastiche), the recollective construction of the subject (which for Jameson has lost its sense of past or future time), and social and political recall (where Jameson sees only a cynical quietism).  My counter-claim is that postmodern memory as exemplified by Ayearst, General Idea, and the other artists and pieces in this book can effectively call into question the existence of the 'real History' ('Cultural Logic', 68) on which all of Jameson's arguments covertly depend and for which he is nostalgic in spite of himself.  Memory, with its evanescent yet specific inflections of meaning, is history in a postmodern culture.  As we have seen, in these examples it is not possible to envision a Rembrandt painting, seventeenth-century medical practices, or Roman mystery cults except through the mediating lens of memory.  This is not to suggest that the past doesn't exist, but rather to specify the mode of its existence, the nature of its'reality'.  Since by definition no statement about the past can be confirmed by examining the supposed facts' (Lowenthal, 187), history cannot exist apart from its viewers and their specific and ever-changing perspectives.  The radical implication is that ' nothing is natural about our memories, that the past ... is an artifice' (Terdiman, 19) erected and mediated by the interests of the present.  If we are tempted to defend Jameson by claiming a physical work of art - its status as physical object - as an irrefragable piece of history, an archaeological reminder, we need only think of how The Unveiling of the Cornucopia or Three Minutes augments the possible meanings of its art-historical referents, how each work changes the nature of its antecedent.  Art-historical citation, then, can move beyond the superficial pastiche described by Jameson to a profound, though sometimes simultaneously playful, engagement with the notions of pastness and history in general.  Memory works; it is effective, not cynical. 

   Three Minutes in particular counters Jameson's notion that 'private temporality', in the sense of personal history or the definition through time of what we call a subject or person, is lost in recent art.  What we often see is just the opposite, an extension of this sense of history - sometimes (as in this instance) through a recollection of art, but also in other memories of past events - into the realm of the subject.  Ayearst has brought seventeenth-century experimental science (in what could be argued to be its masculinist invasiveness) into a contemporary perspective precisely by linking Rembrandt's image with recent medical texts.  We are thus asked to contemplate how the subject is construed today, and specifically how memory, mental and/or corporeal, is part of the definition of the subjecthood.  This latter consideration is at once personal and social, since Three Minutes argues for a more inclusive and compassionate construction of the subject than that imaged by Ayearst's Rembrandt.  And if we construe the political very inclusively as that realm of (unequal) power relations among members of society, then Ayearst's memories, in collaboration with those of her viewers, also act politically.  Art-historical citation, for example - as I will argue throughout this book - is never gender-neutral.  It is important politically that Aycarst, a woman, cites a male artist's privileged exposure of the seat of identity in memory and his mirroring of the intrusions of science.  Ayearst stands back from this invasion precisely by quoting it, and she is thus able to insinuate an implicit critique of these cerebral and arguably masculinist practices by embodying the more compassionate small text about the brain's death. 
 </I

     IV  

  Another difficult argument for the conscriptionists was their linkage of compulsory military training with a "peaceful" Britain.  "Peacefulness" could be interpreted as a promise to protect Britain from the disruptive perils of invasion.  However, the conscriptionist appeal for a peaceful Britain was also based on a rejection of the accusations of militarism and antidemocratic tendencies levelled against them by their opponents.  It is this second definition and the problems which it gave the conscriptionist cause which concern this essay. 

   Just as their critics tried to argue that conscription and economic prosperity did not match, opponents of the conscription movement were quick to equate the scheme with militarism and a break with democratic, peaceful British traditions.  In his book, The Great Illusion, Norman Angell asked poignantly, "Do we not run some danger that with this mania for the imitation of German method we may Germanize England, though never a German soldier land on our soil?" 

   The conscriptionists were extremely sensitive to such accusations.  Lord Roberts was always certain to show that the conscriptionists did not wish to make any violent departure from the traditional English respect for democracy.  In his 1911 book, Fallacies and Facts: An Answer to "Compulsory Service", Roberts admitted that his critics saw compulsory military service as neither constitutional nor English.  To them, it was "an act of violence, an unjust imposition of blood enforced by our seniors on the young men of this country."   

   Roberts also tried to stress that conscription would never be imposed against the will of the working class.  One of Lord Roberts's fondest phrases was that the ballot box had transformed the working classes into the new ruling class, thus making national service their "inalienable privilege" as it was for the aristocratic class of old."   

   The conscription movement also went to great lengths to redefine voluntarism and conscription.  Examples of "peaceful" countries who had adopted conscription were also used with varying levels of effectiveness.  Some conscriptionists came up with unique redefinitions of compulsory and voluntary armies to fit their needs.  In his 1907 pamphlet, National and Non-National Armies, J. Ellis Barker argued that national armies were "composed of the voluntarily united citizens of the whole nation."   

   When searching for foreign examples which presented both a constitutional and democratic version of compulsory service, conscriptionists often gazed towards Switzerland.  The Swiss system of a compulsory militia preserved personal liberties while simultaneously maintaining industrial productivity.   

   As 1914 approached, the conscriptionists sometimes gazed beyond Switzerland to the outer reaches of the empire for inspiration.  In a speech delivered in Bristol on 13 February 1913, Lord Roberts referred to the schemes of universal military training in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa as proof that British political traditions and conscription were not mutually exclusive.  He challenged his listeners to prove that such policies had made any of these dominions "bellicose and aggressive."  Australia held a particular fascination for conscriptionists as its scheme of military training was imposed by a Labour government.  This fact seemed sufficient to Lord Roberts to rebut charges that "civilian armies" would ever be used to put down strikes. 

   Some conscriptionists preferred to look to the British past for precedents.  George Coulton, a medieval historian and conscriptionist, was the leading user of historical examples in support of the movement's goals.  In his booklet, A Strong Army in a Free State, he presented the example of medieval England as a military power with conscription.  According to Coulton, the fourteenth-century army of Edward III was "trained by the completest system of compulsory service organized by a first-rate European nation until modern times."  

   It is interesting to note that few other conscriptionists reached back into the mists of British history.  As previously mentioned, Roberts had harked back to the victories won by the medieval longbow in his appeal for a national system of rifle clubs in the years before becoming president of the National Service League.   However, for the most part, appeals to history were not the main thrust of the major part of the conscriptionists' call to arms.  Few of the conscriptionists could match Coulton's historical knowledge.  Even Coulton was aware that contemporary comparisons might hold more weight with his readers.  In his booklet, A Strong Army in a Free State, only five pages out of fifty deal with detailed historical comparisons.  References to contemporary, democratic Switzerland seemed far more fruitful. 

   How well did the idea of "peacefulness" fit with conscription?  Conscriptionist rhetoric lauding domestic peacefulness and support for democracy starkly contradicts their militarist and antidemocratic image.  Gerald Jordan has noted that the conscriptionists appeared to the British public as "a group of militaristic drum-thumping Colonel Blimps - a pose which certainly since the Boer War, had little appeal for the majority of Englishmen."    For these "socialists" conscription truly was a democratizing force. 

   That being said, it is equally important to note that such views were definitely in the minority.  A majority of both Socialists and British citizens were sufficiently opposed to compulsory military service that it remained an impossible dream for Britain in peacetime.  It was not until the midst of the First World War in January 1916 that the government felt secure enough to introduce legislation to make some form of limited conscription a reality.  It should also be noted that as a popular slogan "peacefulness" could only go so far in selling conscription.  The best popular response came by appealing to public fears over invasion.  When such appeals were made, peacefulness faded far into the background. 

   V  

   The conscription movement was not one for ideological sophisticates.  Lord Roberts and his followers tried earnestly to convert British opinion to the need for conscription but were usually outclassed by their more agile opponents.   Faced with such difficulties, the temptation existed to appeal to the public's base fears about invasion.  The fear of invasion was indisputably the trump card of the conscription movement.  Although conscriptionists tried to tie their scheme to notions of health, prosperity, and "peacefulness," their strongest public response came from graphically portraying the threat that invasion represented. 

   The National Service League supported books like William Le Queux's Invasion of 1910 (1906) and even sponsored their own play, B.S. Townroe's A Nation in Arms (1990).   Invasion could be seen as an immediate threat and compulsory military training could be presented as simply the most effective form of home defence.  Such straightforward arguments reached their peak between 1908-9 and retained some force until 1914 though complicated by the presence of a new voluntary home defence unit - the Territorial Force. 

   Although the conscriptionists relied heavily on invasion rhetoric, especially in their later years, it is necessary to go beyond this well-known side to the movement.  Conscriptionists had other arguments.  The important point is that they tried to use them at all.  It is only by assessing the full scope of arguments of the conscription movement that its place in Edwardian Britain can be full appreciated and evaluated.  </I

   Chapter 2: 
  'The Canadian Mosaic: A Melting Pot on Ice': The Ironies of Ethnicity and Race 

   I enter here upon the general area of ethnicity and race  Yet, just as even the English and French were once immigrants to Canada, so too are they 'ethnic', at least insofar as they possess distinctive cultural customs and languages.  If you don't consider the British as 'ethnic', think about cricket and Yorkshire pudding. 

   Theorists of ethnicity have also made the distinction between ethnicity as the lived experience of 'otherness', and ethnicity as 'governed, packaged, marketed, and consumed' - in Canada, as multiculturalism.  artists to signal that resistance - perhaps even that celebration.  In his poem 'Canadese' (Italian for 'Canadian'), Antonino Mazza uses this kind of irony with a certain deconstructive, critical power: 
 Because life for him
has been labour and struggle, Canadese, remember your father.
Don't try to reject your mother tongue, in our cage, it is wrong;
do canaries smother their private song?
Be patient, don't rage, Canadese, in time we'll belong;
we'll acquire our own sense of this land;
we'll record life and death of our million births; 
we'll have families, above and below the earth.
Canadese, you must never forget
what you are .. never!
because, when you do, they'll remind you.  

   The addressee of this poem - the 'you' - is specifically Italian Canadian, and so my response here is likely different from most readers'.  The ethnicity of the implied reader is an issue not often addressed in studies of ethnic writing, yet the 'we / they' doubleness, which the irony of this poem foregrounds, is as much the basis of the politics of resistance as the source of the alienation of otherness.  And doubleness - of identity, of culture, of loyalties, often of language - is the basis of the experience of immigration in general, for anyone, anywhere.  But in Canada it continues to define the experience of those of any 'different' ethnicity and race - different from the English and French white dominants.  Of course, what for a writer can be a 'pleasure', however perverse (or ironic), can often yield pain for others.  Yet, as I suggested in the last chapter, in this age of the postmodern re-valuing of borders and margins as preferred sites of articulation of difference, many feel that the margins are indeed where the action is: that resistance and contestation make for more exciting art than centrisms of all kinds (ethno-, phallo-, hetero-, and so on).  The fact that, in the day-to-day life of either immigrants or Canadians of 'different' race or ethnicity, that marginalization may not be so valued, or so liberating, does not mean that irony cannot still be an effective tool for articulating both marginalization and the challenges to it. 

   In an important early essay on the 'ethnic voice' in Canadian writing, Eli Mandel noted that doubleness, even 'duplicity', was what all immigrants live and grapple with daily (p. 265).  The literature that comes out of this experience itself exists at 'the interface of two cultures': 'a form concerned to define itself, its voice, in the dialectic of self and other and the duplicities of self-creation, transformation, and identities' (p. 274).  I have been suggesting that irony is one way of coming to terms with this kind of duplicity, for it is the trope that incarnates doubleness, and it does so in ways that are particularly useful to the 'other': irony allows 'the other' to address the dominant culture from within that culture's own set of values and modes of understanding, without being co-opted by it and without sacrificing the right to dissent, contradict, and resist. 

   The need to retain this right is especially clear in the work of those writers who belong to, in the latest terminology, 'visible minorities'.  Perhaps this has a lot to do with the discrimination that they feel, even within what we like to think of as liberal Canada.  Arun Mukherjee has argued that South Asian writers 'may be said to possess that double vision which comes only with alienation from the dominant group'.  This is the double vision that is a fruitful breeding ground for ironies, ironies that voice the contradictions that the outsider can see, even within a seemingly homogeneous culture.  Mukherjee feels that one of the most important roles of literature by ethnic and racial minorities in Canada can be to make the dominant and dominating culture self-conscious (p.95). 

   This too - perhaps intensified - is the role of women writers within these minorities.  As many feminist scholars have noted, ethnic women are doubly marked as outsiders: as female and as racially or ethnically 'other'.  In other words, the basic trope underlying their subversion and resistance, once again, is irony: saying one thing, meaning another.  Often the politicized challenges of works considered feminist, then, are also challenges to 'centred' or '-centric' notions not only of ethnicity and race, but also of class and, in Canada, of geographic and social region. 

   A good example would be the multiple ironies of Lola Lemire Tostevin's poem about her Northern Ontario roots.  It opens with an address to 'general' (Canadian?) readers.  For these, she says, 'the people from my old home town wouldn't be considered / Real People'.  They would not recognize them from their experience of either life or art: 'they wouldn't just walk off the page / to remind you of a mother or a neighbor.'  The ironies are double-directed here, as readers are told that none of them 'would comfortably find a place' here.  The tone of the narration, from here on, is the familiar one of ironic naivete, of the poet's persona as a child growing up in this town as a Franco-Ontarian, Catholic girl who is trying to understand her social environment.  For instance, she once heard the word 'cathouse' applied to one of the places in town.  So first she 'watched for cats'.  When this yielded little, she looked up 'cathouse' in the dictionary, where she found all sorts of 'cat words' - except 'cathouse'.  Among her alphabetical list of these 'cat words' is embedded this satiric, ironic thrust: 'catgut cat hook / I was stunned to learn that catholic was defined as universe-/ al and broad in sympathies and interests.' 

   A Franco-Ontarian writer - like a native, Metis, or Acadian one - is 'other' in Canada, in a way that a Quebecois can probably never be, given Quebec's history and institutions, which have increasingly effectively worked to protect that particular historically francophone part of Canadian culture.  However, whether the culture be Quebecois, English Canadian, or that of almost any ethnic group, one shared attribute reappears consistently: they are all usually portrayed as pronouncedly patriarchal, and this explains in part why the feminist and ethnic resistances often dovetail.  As Myrna Kostash has put it, reacting against the notion that there is no need to attack female oppression (or ethnic discrimination) because these are obvious concerns of 'human' liberation: 
 Well, I think that has been exposed by some feminists for the liberal fantasy it is, and as an ethnic, I feel much the same.  I'm not 'just' a Canadian; I think there is an obligation among the oppressed minorities and oppressed groups in this country to redefine themselves from their own experience, with their own purpose in mind and not be misled by the liberal fantasies of the dominant culture.  

   For immigrants, the need to resist that dominant culture - however liberal or well-meaning - may be intensified because of the weight of cultural tradition, made heavier (not lighter) by distance and time, by memory, by a sense of exile or simple nostalgia.  Therefore the drive towards self-definition within a new culture may well involve separation from this ethnic past, at least temporarily.  And irony is a useful device for articulating both the pull of that tradition and the need to contest it.  It is also a way to challenge ethnic stereotyping.  Here is Len Gasparini writing to Pier Giorgio di Cicco, a fellow Italian Canadian poet: 
 Let us string our mandolins and sing 
O Sole Mio every night.
The joy is ours.
Strangled by a spaghetti stereotype, 
an Italian is supposed to lay bricks. 
You build poems with the stars.  

   I mentioned earlier that what we currently call postmodernism has entailed a re-valuing of difference in culture: difference in terms of gender, race, ethnicity, class, sexual preference.  The 'ex-centric' or off-centre is valued over the centre.  The postmodern distrust of centres and the hierarchies they imply can be seen in many ways: in the recoding of the (denigrated) notion of regionalism into the positive concepts of the local and specific; in the focusing of attention on the periphery rather than the metropolis; and in the general interest in diversity, in the different rather than the same.  Part of this is simply an inversion of pre-existing hierarchies,since all binaries indeed conceal hierarchies, as Jacques Derrida has taught us.  Poststructuralist thought like his has also suggested that all meaning is created by differences and is sustained by reference to other meaning.  So, while this equally binary inversion operates as a powerful challenge to the established power of centres (of economic, political, social, and cultural power), the postmodern also tries to go beyond this and to rethink binary oppositions completely in terms of the multiple, the plural, and the heterogeneous: 'and / also' thinking replaces 'either / or'. 

   For literary and cultural studies, the end result of this postmodern reassessment has been a new cultivation of cultural difference as positively valued diversity and plurality.  A good example of this kind of rethinking in the area of ethnicity is Werner Sollors's book Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American Culture,  One of the reasons for irony's key position in postmodernism, however, is that excentricity is what in fact defines the postmodern, and resistance to a dominant (from within) is part of that definition.  Lipsitz points out that, since ethnic and racial minorities can neither assimilate nor separate completely from the dominant culture, they are forced into 'complex and creative cultural negotiations' with and against that dominant force, negotiations that involve confronting it with their own history and traditions.  Lipsitz even goes so far as to make the doubleness or 'bifocality' of the ethnic vision the paradigm for 'the decentered and fragmented nature of contemporary experience'.  In other words, ethnic (and presumably racial) minorities are paradoxically both marginal and typical: 'Masters of irony in an ironic world, they often understand that their marginality makes them more appropriate spokespersons for society than mainstream groups unable to fathom or address the causes of their alienation.'  Perhaps.  But this kind of logic denies the specific kind of doubleness of the ethnic vision; it risks ignoring the doubled alienation that particular vision may represent in an already alienated and alienating world.  </I

    PART ONE 
  THE ERA OF EDIFICATION 

   In the era of Victoria and Edward, magazines were seen and saw themselves as instruments of moral and pedagogic improvement.  Man was perfectible, and the periodicals he read would help perfect him.  In the view of George Stewart, a magazine "is a great national university, diffused, without loss of effectiveness, throughout an entire nation." 

   At first the national status of magazines was doubtful.  Writing in 1868, Henry James Morgan defended his listing of newspaper editors and writers in his Bibliotheca Canadensis by saying, "In our young country ... our principal newspapers may be considered as holding no unimportant position in Literature.  We have not many periodicals of a purely literary kind; and the morning journal may be said to be as much a literary as it is a political organ ....  Besides, the majority of our journalists have been men of superior education and literary culture, who have themselves written works and pamphlets.  A very distinguished author has recently remarked 'that a hundred years hence the newspaper will be the only possible book.' " 

   In the short or even long term the distinguished author was proven wrong, but his prediction was not wildly unfounded.  The nineteenth-century line between newspapers and magazines was blurred.  Newspapers published much poetry and fiction, but usually left cartoons to magazines.  Egerton Ryerson's Christian Guardian, the most important church paper before Confederation, resembled a magazine in some respects and was in fact the forerunner of the United Church's New Outlook and Observer .  Canadian Illustrated News and Grip regarded themselves as weekly papers, and Saturday Night began as one. 

   Yet magazines, not books or newspapers, would emerge as the national medium.  Magazines were advertised and reviewed as if they were books, and, for the writers of books, magazines were an indispensable bridge to their public.  After or during a newspaper apprenticeship, most fiction writers began by contributing stories to magazines - for copyright reasons these were usually British or U.S. magazines and continued to produce short stories and serials while appearing between hard covers. 

   The causes for magazines' prominence were relatively simple.  Newspapers, confined to cities and towns and often blindly partisan, could not present a judicious national overview.  Books lacked the magazine's continuity, usually only presented one writer at a time and were beset by confused copyrights and unsatisfactory economies of scale.  With its built-in advantages, a magazine could be all things to all Canadians. 

   "All" is used advisedly.  The founders and editors of magazines were class conscious, although the class consisted not of the aristocracy, but of those who, through diligence and intrinsic moral worth, proved themselves eligible for membership in an elite.  The magazine's "mission," said George Stewart, "is to stimulate and afford expression to the higher thought and tastes of a people, to bring the country's best thought, under the most favourable circumstances and in the most attractive form, before the best classes of the country's readers - the classes upon whom the shaping of the political, social, intellectual and even industrial future of the nation most largely depend." 

   Stewart and his colleagues seemed to presuppose these natural leaders ensconced in armchairs, puffing pipes and nodding gravely or smiling gently in approval.  For Stewart a good magazine is "reserved for the quietest half hours of comfortable leisure, when the mind is in the most receptive mood and most ready to respond to facts and arguments attractively and candidly presented, or to the quiet touches of beauty, humour, pathos that lighter literature furnishes...." 

   Ribaldry was not part of the lighter touch; even humour had its moral applications.  Which is not to say that the Victorians were humorless.  Besides Grip, their comic journals included Punch in Canada  - founded in 1848 in Montreal, it was the first to run regular political cartoons - , Diogenes, Grinchuckle, The Grumbler and, in the Edwardian period, Knox McGee's Moon.  Describing the struggle between the sacred and secular and how they might be reconciled was a constant in the higher-minded magazines, especially those published by the churches but also in the popular press.  It was the age, after all, of Origin of Species, and the clergymen sometimes had to end in arguing that evolution itself was part of God's ongoing design.  The relationship between science and theology was tirelessly examined and, only slightly less so, the gap between rich and poor.  The latter was linked to the search for utopian panaceas like Henry George's Single Tax, and not just in J. W. Bengough's Single-minded Grip.  As W. J. Rattray noted in Belford's Monthly in May 1878, "Whatever sins of omission or commission may be fairly laid to the charge of our age and generation, indifference to the momentous problems of human life and destiny is not one of them ....  Men are far too seriously-minded in their search after truth...to treat the solemn questions which persistently obtrude themselves for solution on every age, with levity, scorn or a flippant superficiality." 

   In creating this edifying spectacle, the influence of the Scots Presbyterians, those relentless educators of themselves and others, cannot be overstated.  With the merger of its sects in 1875, the Presbyterian church was until 1925 the largest Protestant denomination.  Many if not most of the printers, publishers and editors were Scots and had all the characteristics of that enterprising, argumentative race.  As Elizabeth Waterston has pointed out, Scotland created a battalion of literary exemplars: Robert Burns for lyric poets, Sir Walter Scott for historical romancers, Macaulay and Carlyle for the writers of "Great Man" and thesis history, Robert Louis Stevenson for those who wrote adventure stories for children, J. M. Barrie for those, like Ralph Connor and L. M. Montgomery, who limned regional idylls. 

   Literary taste tended to be conservative.  Some editors like Graeme Mercer Adam deplored "the intellectual vivisection methods" of Henry James and W.D. Howells and "the loathsome realism and putridity" of Emile Zola and Anatole France.  As Claude Bissell says in the Literary History of Canada, in poetry the Canadian critic and writer disliked "technical experimentation, the intellectual, any suggestion of the commonplace and the realistic."  Desired "were elegance of diction, nobility of sentiment, and clarity and picturesqueness of observation." 

   Despite the bows made to poetry and fiction, what the editors took most seriously was intellectual debate.  The great issues - the conflicting claims of science and religion, the overriding question of whether Canada would meld, even merge with the United States - were endlessly debated.  In retrospect, free traders and protectionists, annexationists and imperialists all seem utopians.  The free traders and annexationists imagined that a north-south flow would produce nothing but prosperity.  The imperialists supposed not just that their country would have a magnificent future, but that it would become a partner or even leader in an ever more glorious British Empire. 

   One debate was about how magazines themselves would take form.  The imperialist (and future knight) J.G. Bourinot, for many years the clerk of the House of Commons and a frequent contributor to periodicals, wrote that

  No doubt there is room in the Dominion for a magazine combining the features of 'Blackwood,' the 'Contemporary' and the 'Quarterly Review'; that is to say, poetry, fiction, criticism, reviews of topics of the day, and in fact, original literary effort of the higher order, which, though mostly ephemeral in its character, must have much influence for the time being on the culture and the education of the public mind ... if such a venture is to succeed hereafter it must have behind it sufficient capital to engage the assistance of the best Canadian writers, who now send their work to American and British periodicals.  Such a magazine must be carefully edited, and not made the dumping-ground for the crude efforts of literary dabblers or for romantic gush and twaddle ....  

   That Bourinot, an expert on constitutional history, could comment authoritatively on literary matters was typical.  Victorians could comment authoritatively on anything.  They were not narrow specialists, but took the world's mind and actions for their domain.  Literature was not just poetry, fiction and belles lettres, but anything in which verbal analysis and narrative held sway.  Limited as their aesthetic conceptions may have been, they did see humanity as a whole, and the best magazines they founded and wrote for had the same consonance and comprehensiveness. 

  Pre-Confederation Clusters 

   If the magazines prior to Confederation were usually short-lived, at least there were a lot of them.  Solemnly conceived, desperately hopeful, they were pioneering and they knew it.  The age of advertising had yet to arrive, and they relied on pitifully few subscribers.  To a modern reader it is a confusing world of innumerable titular changes and contributors who were anonymous, pseudonymous or hidden behind initials.  Colonial, these magazines heavily reprinted material from Britain and the United States, at the same time as they were tracing the faint outlines of a new culture. 

   Magazines in what is now Canada were not spontaneously generated by Confederation.  If Confederation marked the birth of a big nation it also tolled the death of little ones.  The eastern British North American colonies were, after all, embryonic independent nations, and ones whose periodicals aspired to serve self-contained publics. 

   The first magazine to appear in British North America was Halifax's Nova Scotia Magazine and Comprehensive Review of Literature, Politics and News (1789-92).  It reached 200 subscribers - including judges, surgeons and the Bishop of Nova Scotia - and was printed on a wooden screw press by John Howe, father of the famous Joseph, who also sold it over the counter of his office (eighteenth- and nineteenth-century bookshops were often run in conjunction with a press and journal).  Edited by the Reverend William Cochran, the magazine had some local content, though much of it was reprints.  There then followed in the Maritimes such initiatives as the Nova Scotia and New Brunswick or Historical, Literary, Theological and Miscellaneous Repository; Acadian Magazine and Literary Mirror; New Brunswick Religious and Literary Journal; The Pearl; Halifax Monthly Magazine; and Nova Scotia New Monthly Magazine.  Most had varying titles and were located in Halifax or Saint John.  None lasted more than two years. 

   The most interesting of these, because of the people behind them, were Mayflower, or Ladies Acadian Newspaper (1851-2) and Provincial, or Halifax Monthly (1852-53).  Mary Eliza Herbert, the nineteen-year-old daughter of an immigrant Irish blacking manufacturer, published The Mayflower as a thirty-two-page publication in May 1851, seeking readers in those wishing "to roam a while in the flowery fields of romance - to hold communion with the Muses."  As the first female editor of a magazine in British North America, Herbert narrowly beat out Mary Jane Lawson nee Katzmann.  At twenty-four, Katzmann, the poetical daughter of a German and his New England wife, became the Provincial's editor.  Aiming for a wider audience - male as well as female - she drew more from regional writers than had Herbert and had higher cultural and social ambitions for her audience. 

   In Quebec the first magazine had been started in 1792, the bilingual Quebec Magazine (Magasin de Quebec; ou, Recueil utile et amusant de Litterature, histoire, politique, etc., particulierement adapte a l'usage de l'Amerique.   In its less than two years of life the Quebec City periodical was edited by Alexander Spark on the press of the Neilson family, prominent in Quebec printing for the next half-century or more. 

   In the Canadas, magazines trailed, doglike, the growth of population, though the potential audience was always small.  In the 1840s, the market for a Toronto periodical might extend east to Montreal and south to New York State, but was mainly confined to the province's half-million widely dispersed inhabitants.  The later distinctions among farm, church and literary magazines were smudged.  Agricultural papers were the first family magazines, and the Anglican, Presbyterian and Methodist church journals often had literary content.  Still, there were certain fast divisions between country and town.  Those who aspired to gentility might turn to magazines with titles like the Canadian Gem and Family Visitor; the more practical-minded might opt for the Canadian Agricultural Journal (Montreal, 1848-68). 

   Whatever the magazine's tack, the power inherent in the press had come permanently, if at first precariously, to reside along the Great Lakes and the southern edge of the Laurentian Shield. 

   In Montreal, the foremost city, Samuel Hull Wilcocke ("Lewis Luke MacCulloh, Esquire") edited the iconoclastic The Scribbler: A Series of Weekly Essays on Literary, Critical, Satirical, Moral, and Local Subjects, interspersed with pieses of Poetry (1822-27), which shifted to nearby Rouses Point in Vermont after its first year.  In Montreal, Nahum Mower printed the monthly Canadian Magazine and Literary Repository (1823-25), which amounted to four volumes of almost six hundred pages each, and David Chisholme, a Scot, edited the quarterly Canadian Review and Literary and Historical Journal (1824-26), which published "The Rising Village" by Oliver Goldsmith, grand-nephew of the playwright and novelist who had been Dr. Johnson's friend.  

   In Upper Canada, where John Strachan attempted the Christian Examiner (1819-20), the first illustrated periodical was the Canadian Literary Magazine (1833).  Published by George Gurnett in York (Toronto), each issue had an engraved portrait, "the first we believe," said the editor, " ... ever engraved in Upper Canada - engraved too on Canadian stone, and from thence, by means of a Canadian press, transferred to Canadian paper." 

   Counting both Canadas, before 1850 there were magazines in Montreal, York, Kingston, Brockville, Cobourg and Hamilton.  From a literary viewpoint, the most important was the literary Garland (1835-51) in Montreal, published by John Lovell and edited by his brother-in-law John Gibson.  Whichever literati the Canadas possessed were published in the Garland: John Richardson, Charles Sangster, Rosanna Leprohon, Anna Jameson, Catherine Parr Traill and her sister, Susanna Moodie.  The Belleville wife of the former Endlish officer and ne'er-do-well farmer Dunbar Moodie, Susanna even edited a magazine herself, rather pathetically entitled Victoria Magazine: A Cheap Periodical for the Canadian People (1847-48), and contributed serialized excerpts from novels, poems, even a song to the Garland (the first magazine to regularly publish musical scores).  In its second year, it began to publish lithographs of landscapes, children and well-dressed citizens, with tissue-paper overlays to preserve the pictures for framing, though these expensive trappings were dropped in 1849 for reasons of economy. 
 </I

    1 
  THE LONG GESTATION: 
  1837-1937 

   It is well known that mercantilist France did not permit the setting up of printing presses in its colony, New France, insisting that all publications of whatever kind be published in Paris.  Nevertheless much writing in a variety of genres was inspired by contacts with Canada and its aboriginal inhabitants, and some of these were printed soon after completion, while others had to wait for years or even decades.  Among the writings of New France were accounts of their voyages by Jacques Cartier and Samuel de Champlain, those of explorers Jolliet and d'Iberville, the annual Jesuit missionaries' reports to their superiors in the mother country issued under the name Relations (1632-1672), detailed ethnographic descriptions of Amerindian life by Sagard and more fanciful ones by LaHontan, the massive correspondence of Marie de l'Incarnation and that of Elisabeth Begon, the annals of the Hotel-Dieu de Montreal by Marie Morin, Pierre Boucher's inventory of the colony's resources, and historical accounts by Lescarbot, Dollier de Casson, and Charlevoix.  Cartier's texts are believed to have influenced the subsequent literary production of Rabelais and Montaigne.  

   No novels emerged during the French regime.  This genre had its beginnings in France as early as the sixteenth century, yet it would be some three hundred years before it made its appearance in French Canada.  As for reading fiction, the Catholic clergy, whose power actually increased following the British Conquest, lost no time in denouncing such 'dangerous' books.  As early as 1771, for example, Mgr Briand, Bishop of Quebec, urged his parishioners to 'stop reading those impious works that are spreading through the diocese.'  In the 1840s, Bishop Bourget of Montreal led a campaign against 'the reading of immoral novels', and in Chauveau's Charles Guerin (1853) there is a reference to an auto-da-fe that nearly destroyed the entire library of M. Guerin senior, and may have been based on fact.  In the postscript to another novel, published in serial form in 1846, Patrice Lacombe's La Terre paternelle, we read: 'Let's leave their blood-soaked novels to the old countries spoiled by civilization, and paint the child of the land the way he really is ...'  When Quebec novelists did begin to publish in the nineteenth century, they would write a preface denouncing their very genre, or disclaim their work's fictional nature.  Antoine Gerin-Lajoie writes about his Jean Rivard (1862, 1864): 'This is not a novel ...', and a critic claimed that this influential work was a 'faithful sketch of ... a young Canadian pioneer ...' Jules-Paul Tardivel, in his futuristic Pour la patrie (1895)/ For My Country, prefaced the book by noting that 'the modern novel, and especially the French novel ... seems to be an arm forged by Satan to destroy the human race.'  Rejean Beaudoin has said that the call in 1861 by the leading literary ideologue, abbe Henri-Raymond Casgrain, for writers to draw on legends as major sources for literary creativity was a tactic for turning authors away from writing novels: 'One of the essential functions of the legend seems to have been to build a dike against the popularity of the modern novel ... French-Canadian writers were urged to emulate the simplicity and purity of folk imagery, that direct reflection of the beauty of traditional folkways.'  In 1866 Casgrain traced the main lines of a national and religious literature, which, he said, would be 'chaste and pure like the virginal mantle of our long winters ...  It will have none of the masks of modern realism, that manifestation of impious and materialist thought.' 

   These factors explain the slow emergence of the novel form in Quebec, as well as the fact that the first novelist, the twenty-three-year-old Philippe Aubert de Gaspe fils  (1814-41), and his more famous father - who, it is believed, authored parts of his son's novel, L'Influence d'un livre (1837), as well as his own classic, Les Anciens Canadiens (1863) - both made ample use of legends in these two works.  In fact, in both the central plot is interrupted by the insertion of legends and songs drawn from folk traditions.  Andre Senecal has rightly stressed that from a generic point of view L'Influence d'un livre is nothing more than the outline of a novel. 

   Three narrative elements intertwine in this primitive text: the story of the search of an impoverished alchemist, Charles Amand, for the philosopher's stone that will make him rich, inspired by the manual of Albert le Petit; the murder of the peddler Guillemette by the hideous Lepage; and the romance between Eugene Saint-Ceran and Amand's daughter, Amelie, which ends happily when the former graduates as a doctor and is able to bribe the previously obstinate father to consent to the marriage.  The murder, and the story of Amand's search for the elusive formula for gold, were both based on real people and events in the Saint-Jean-Port-Joli region south-east of Quebec City.  

   According to Andre Senecal, this Gothic work achieves some unity 'at the level of its moral discourse'.  He sees de Gaspe, the son of a penurious aristocrat, reflecting the unease of his social stratum before the growing materialism of an emergent capitalism, but not without ambiguity.  Thus, for Senecal, what ties this loose work together is the thirst for gold.  Indeed, in addition to Amand, who dreams of gilded treasure, there is Lepage, who kills for a pittance, and the central figure of a folk legend, Rose Latulipe, who, enticed by luxury, abandons her fiance for an elegant gentleman (the devil in disguise).  According to the misogynist Saint-Ceran, the author's alter ego, women, those 'merchants of emotions', learn to flaunt their charms 'before those who have gold ... even if they are degenerates'.  Yet, having made money himself while seemingly condemning an acquisitive society, he says of his future father-in-law: 'He must be as poor as a churchmouse.  I'll offer him some money and he won't be able to resist', thus preparing the 'purchase' of his betrothed. 

   Unfortunately the version of L'Influence d'un livre that most Quebec readers would know was that of the 'edited' second edition of 1864, which was revised by Casgrain and reprinted several times subsequently, with the good abbe, holder of the copyright, making a tidy sum, especially from the school market for which he was responsible.  The 1968 edition, the first since 1885, is a facsimile copy of Casgrain's expurgated text, in which the rather mild erotic references and the host of quotes of authors who, since the original edition, had incurred the wrath of the Church, were unceremoniously removed.  The title was also changed to give less weight to the alchemist's manual, and now became Le Chercheur de tresors ou L'Influence d'un livre.  (Andre Senecal's edition of 1984 is the first to reproduce the original text and title.) 

   The imitative Gothic form represented the first phase of the emergence of the novel genre in French Canada.  By the mid-1840s it gave way to the roman de la fidelite, which would be dominant for about a hundred years.  This principal mode imposed on writers the task of inspiring readers to safeguard the French language, and the customs, traditions, and faith of the French-Canadian nationality in accordance with the ideological drive for survival (survivance).  Its main branch was the roman du terroir - the novel of the land.  The other branch, the historical novel, would appear later in the nineteenth century and also have a long life.  Its main thrust, as we shall see, was to turn its gaze backwards to the 'glories' of the French regime. 

   The roman du terroir was inaugurated by La Terre paternelle (1846), a short novel by Patrice Lacombe (1807-63), which preached the superior values of the agricultural vocation over life in the cities and in the lumber camps or in the fur trade.  Chauvin pere deeds his land to his eldest son, who mismanages it; he then takes it back, rents it to Anglos, fails in business, loses his farm and is forced to lead a poverty-stricken existence, with his son, in Montreal.  Salvation comes, however, from a formerly wayward younger son who had escaped to the pays d'en haut (the fur-trading areas upstream on the Ottawa River) and now returns with money enough to buy back the farm, la terre paternelle. 

   Both here and in Charles Guerin: Roman de moeurs canadiennes (1853), by P.-J.-O. Chauveau (1820-90), an inherited patrimony is in danger of falling into the hands of the etrangers - the Anglais, clearly named in Lacombe's work and referred to in a veiled way in Charles Guerin  It is the story of a family, headed by the widow Guerin, that nearly loses its property in the St Lawrence valley, owing to the schemes of Wagnaer, a Protestant from Guernsey, and his (Balzacian) corrupt lawyer.  Their plot is thwarted by the return of one of the sons, Pierre, from Europe.  He retrieves the heritage (as in La Terre paternelle) and creates an agricultural-industrial enterprise to keep young people from emigrating.  Chauveau and Lacombe were the first novelists to transcribe phonetically many characteristic traits of Quebecois popular speech (unfortunately, regional vocabulary was set off by italics) and to introduce genre scenes of typical Quebec rural life that would be imitated in the years to come.  

   Like Charles Guerin, the two-volume Jean Rivard (1862, 1864) by Antoine Gerin-Lajoie (1824-82), aimed to stop the mass exodus of French Canadians to the industrial towns of New England by urging settlement in as yet uninhabited regions of Quebec.  Similarly to its predecessors but on a much larger scale, this epic 'novel' projected the establishment of networks of agricultural centres with seasonal, farm-related industries as an antidote to emigration and to the surplus of the so-called liberal professionals - priests, doctors, lawyers, and notaries.  Like Lacombe and Chauveau, but with much more emphasis, Gerin-Lajoie counterpoised the rural and urban milieus, purporting to contrast the decadence of the city, which offered both superficial pleasures and profound misery, with the much simpler and healthier 'natural' environment of the countryside. 

   Gerin-Lajoie had already established a considerable reputation as the author of the song 'Un Canadien errant', about the exiled Patriotes of 1837, and of the historical play Le Jeune Latour, when his treatise-like Jean Rivard appeared in serial form for the first time (with its statistics, quotes from government reports, and copious economic, ethnographic, and linguistic notes).  This, his one and only work of fiction - whose two volumes are subtitled Le Defricheur (The Pioneer), and L'Economiste (The Economist) - would become the most popular novel of the nineteenth century after Les Anciens Canadiens.  Reprinted sixteen times up to 1958, it even ran in serial form in the Paris daily, Le Monde, some fifteen years after its first publication.  The work would be called 'l'evangile rustique de la race' (rustic gospel of the race) because of its preaching of the ideology of agriculturisme, the term coined by historian Michel Brunet for the doctrine of clerical and lay ideologues who mythified and glorified the forced retreat into the countryside of French-Canadian society following the Conquest.  In epic style, using a military vocabulary (victory, conquest, siege, attack), Gerin-Lajoie tells the story of land-clearing in the Eastern Townships and the growth of his hero's 'petite republique', a nearly perfect utopian micro-society. 

   The first volume traces the herculean efforts of Jean Rivard and his loyal disciple, Pierre Gagnon, to clear the land and establish a foothold in the former wilderness.  The second deals with the development of the colony, its growth in population and prosperity and the meteoric rise of the hero from simple pioneer to mayor, justice of the peace, militia major, and a revered member of the legislature.  The colony grows into Rivardville, with its own parish and school board.  The city-country dichotomy is articulated through the correspondence between Rivard and his longtime friend Gustave Charmenil, who is obliged to eke out a living as copyist and translator in Montreal, all the while commenting on the striking contrasts between his dismal life and the heroic feats of Rivard and his followers.  Jean Rivard and the parish priest, Octave Doucet, whose name combines echoes of classical grandeur with gentleness,are the pillars of the civil society in Rivardville.  They are often found past midnight in the presbytery discussing theology and philosophy, or planning the future of their community in the more unlikely location of the Rivards' bedroom where the hero's wife, the perfect Louise, had long been asleep.  Thus Gerin-Lajoie, a founding member and three-times president of the radical-liberal-nationalist Institut canadien de Montreal  - a sort of people's university that was to fight clerical hegemony for several decades - forsakes his earlier forward-looking ideas by conforming to the dominant Church-directed vision of the traditional society and succumbs to the strong ideological pressures of his day.  
 </I

     Hume's Extreme Skepticism in Treatise I IV 7   1 

  IRA SINGER  
  Northwestern University
 Evanston, IL 60208-1315 
 USA 

   Introduction  

   Hume finds himself in an appalling state during Treatise I iv 7 (the conclusion of Book I).  He is almost bereft of beliefs; he believes, for a short time, only that he cannot believe anything else.  But, being an assiduous student of human nature, Hume makes this extreme skeptical crisis into material for naturalistic study.  He carefully reports how extreme skepticism comes about, what it is like, and how it passes. Here I follow Fogelin, who argues that the Treatise supplies a 'natural history of philosophy' - a narrative of the phenomenological and causal sequences of philosophical states of mind.  See Hume's Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 1985), Ch. 7.  See also Fogelin's discussions in 'The Tendency of Hume's Skepticism,' in Burnyeat, ed., The Skeptical Tradition (Berkeley: University of California Press 1983); and in 'Hume's Scepticism,' in The Cambridge Companion to Hume, David Fate Norton, ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993).

   Part of my aim in this paper is to supplement Fogelin by exploring in detail the natural history in I iv 7.  But another part of my aim is to suggest, contra Fogelin, that extreme skepticism is a problem rather than a tool for Hume, and that Hume is better at developing extreme skepticism than he is at domesticating it. 

   An old interpretive tradition ignores or downplays Hume's detached naturalistic reflections in I iv 7, and focuses only on his involved personal experience of skepticism.  Oddly enough, interpretations in this tradition tend to treat Hume's experience dismissively and derisively.  For instance, Thomas Reid notes that Hume philosophizes and is driven to skepticism 'only in solitude and retirement,' while in 'society' he yields 'to the dominion of common sense,' and remarks: 'surely if his friends apprehended this, they would have the charity never to leave him alone.'  But this joke is an unfair response to Hume.  True, only solitude enables Hume to reflect, and so to experience extreme skepticism; but solitude also makes healthy non-skeptical reflection possible, so that the problem Hume presses on us is how to sustain reflection without inviting skepticism.  Moreover, Hume does not present himself as subject to a special malady, as Reid's joke implies; Hume presents himself as a representative philosopher, engaging in full and free reflection and for that reason alone menaced by extreme skepticism.  He then works hard to understand the character of extreme skepticism, and its entanglements with reflection in general.  So Reid's premature ridicule of skepticism only threatens our chance to understand both skepticism and reflection better. 

   It is more common these days to take Hume's naturalism seriously, but ignore or downplay (or treat as a mere mask or stratagem) his personal experience of skepticism.   But this treatment of the text, by focusing only on the fact that Hume the naturalist doesn't consider a permanent state of extreme skepticism to be a live (or livable) option, tends toward a telescoped account of Hume's states of mind in I iv 7.  The generic telescoped account of I iv 7 is: 'Hume draws skeptical conclusions, and can't think of any way to refute them.  Then he immerses himself in everyday life and returns to everyday belief, and that's it.'  But Hume really offers a far richer account of the skeptic's states of mind.  Attending to this rich account of skepticism helps us to appreciate more fully both Hume's naturalism, and his naturalism's problems. 

   So Hume's detailed description of his skeptical experiences deserves close and balanced attention.  As I read the description, it involves seven distinct phases. 

   I Psychological Stage-Setting  

   Hume begins I iv 7 in a doubly reflective mood: he has examined human cognition at length, is about to turn to other matters, and feels inclined to reflect on his results and his prospects.  But from the start his reflections are negative.  He remembers his 'past errors and perplexities,' and that memory convinces him that his faculties are weak, disordered, and altogether in a 'wretched condition' (264).  He sees that he cannot expect any support or comfort from other people; for his philosophy has placed him in a 'forlorn solitude' (264).  He cannot mix with 'the crowd,' for as a philosopher he sees their 'deformity' (264).  But no one will leave the crowd to join him in his unenviable position.  Finally, his solitude does not - as it might  - increase his assurance and determination.  Without the 'approbation of others' (265), he has no confidence in his own reasoning, but instead dreads 'error and absurdity.' All these reflections flow from and reinforce Hume's 'melancholy' and 'despair' (264), and predispose him to skepticism. 

   This epistemological pessimism engulfs Hume suddenly, and fits badly with much of Book I.  Indeed, someone who has read all of Book I except for the Conclusion might reasonably put these words in Hume's mouth: 'having refuted metaphysical conceptions of the understanding and having sketched a proper scientific account of that phenomenon, I am eager to extend the science of human nature by examining the passions and morality.'  How, then, are we to understand Hume's pessimistic turn?  Perhaps in this way: in Book I Part iv, he has seen skeptical arguments (about reason, body, personal identity) triumph again and again.  Each time he has maintained his optimism about cognition by noting that the skeptic's triumph must be ephemeral.  But by I iv 7 Hume's 'sentiments' have been transformed; because of his extended study of skepticism triumphant, despair has displaced hope, and he is ready to think the worst about human cognition, even before reflecting on particular skeptical arguments.  Presently, I will suggest that this sort of pessimistic turn about cognition is not arbitrary; instead, it (or, at least, its possibility) bears an internal relation to investigating cognition naturalistically.  For now, he important point is that Hume's description of extreme skepticism is itself naturalistic - causal - from the ground up: he sets the stage for reviewing extreme skeptical arguments by describing the history and the states of mind that render him receptive to those arguments. 

   II The Triumph of Extreme Skepticism  

   In the second phase of Hume's skeptical progress, he roundly condemns the imagination, the human faculty that is crucial if we are to get and retain many beliefs, and so he plunges into extreme skepticism. 

   Hume reaches extreme skeptical conclusions by citing and reflecting on arguments from Parts iii and iv of Treatise Book I.  But before citing these arguments, he attacks human cognitive faculties in general (not merely, as in the psychological stage-setting I have just discussed, his own cognitive faculties).  The attack is twofold: first, he laments his lack of any 'criterion' of truth (265).  Second, he laments what's left to him (and to the rest of us), namely 'a strong propensity to consider objects strongly in that view, under which they appear to me' (265).  This propensity is the imagination's crucial feature; without the propensity we could have only beliefs about the uninterpreted contents of present consciousness. 

   This attack on the imagination is curious, just as Hume's pessimistic turn at the start of I iv 7 was curious.  In the rest of Book I, Hume has shown that the imagination is a crucial faculty, without which human beings would have few beliefs.  He could now underscore this positive naturalistic result.  Instead, he suggests that the imagination is trivial, before citing any relevant arguments.  Why does Hume attack, rather than extol, the imagination? 

   The simplest answer is that Hume has in mind the arguments that (he believes) force us to think of the imagination as trivial.  Perhaps that is the whole answer.  But I think that there is also at work here an unacknowledged shift of attitude, a sudden move from thinking of the human constitution as epistemically enabling to thinking of it as epistemically disabling.  To elaborate: once we have isolated and described any crucial, causally efficacious feature of human cognition, call it X, X will strike us in two different ways.  Sometimes we will be glad that we have X, because it makes possible so many beliefs (or even so much knowledge).  At other times, though, all our beliefs will seem threatened just because they rest on X, and X seems incapable of bearing so much weight.  When X strikes us as thus insufficient or trivial, arguments against X will come to mind; the shift comes first, the arguments second.  The shift makes entertaining the arguments possible, and makes them seem obviously right.  Naturalistic epistemology will, then, make possible a pessimistic turn, which carries the seeds of extreme skepticism. 10  10 To clarify two important points: (1)  I am not arguing that all naturalists are stuck with pessimism and skepticism, but only that a form of pessimism that makes skepticism psychologically possible, and perhaps also argumentatively plausible, has a non-arbitrary connection to naturalism. (2)  I do not try here to settle the issue how much of Hume's extreme skepticism flows only from his naturalistic commitments as deformed by the 'theory of ideas,' and how much of it flows from other features of his naturalistic commitments.  I assume that something other than the theory of ideas does some work in driving Hume to skepticism - partly because, of the three skeptical arguments Hume cites in I iv 7, only that broached in I iv 4 seems to me to depend irrevocably on the theory of ideas; and partly because Hume seems inclined to think that any 'anatomizing' can 'trivialize.'  On this last matter see (a)  Treatise III iii 6, 620-1; and (b) Hume's letter of 17 September 1739, to Hutcheson, in Grieg, ed., The letters of David Hume (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1932), 32-3. 

   For a forceful statement of the position that Hume's skepticism depends entirely on the thorough deformation of his naturalism by the theory of ideas, see Martin Bell and Marie McGinn, 'Naturalism and Skepticism,' Philosophy 65 (1990) 399-418.  Despite my prima facie disagreement with Bell and McGinn about the role of the theory of ideas, I agree with them that Hume's extreme skepticism is the ruin rather than the helpmate of his naturalism.  I also find valuable their suggestion that the indispensable first step toward skepticism is a certain sort of open-mindedness: namely, the thought that it is after all possible, though unlikely, that fundamental parts of 'our ordinary outlook' are subject to a thoroughly negative theoretical assessment. 

   Mapping this notion of a shift of attitude on to I iv 7 yields the following reading: Hume's pessimistic predisposition to think of the human constitution as an epistemic infirmity creates a tendency to lose all belief; that tendency is expressed and developed in slightly different forms in the different skeptical arguments.  Hume's resistance to these arguments is perfunctory, his progress to skepticism smooth, because he is antecedently inclined to reach skeptical conclusions.  According to this reading, then, Hume takes the crucial step in his skeptical progress at the margins of the text; so that, if we are to understand and criticize skepticism in a way that does justice to Hume, we must ultimately focus not on his detailed skeptical arguments, but on the character (and aptness) of his initial pessimistic shift. 

   However, even if the detailed skeptical arguments Hume cites in I iv 7 play their role only after a pessimistic shift, still their role is essential: they turn epistemic pessimism into skeptical despair, they cause Hume's suspect beliefs to cease to be beliefs.  So, continuing the task of looking closely at Hume's narrative of his states of mind in I iv 7, we need to see what these arguments are and how they do their work. 

   Hume cites three skeptical arguments in I iv 7.  He arranges them so that the second argument removes hopes we are left with after the first, and the third removes hopes we are left with after the second, so that at the end we are deprived of all cognitive hopes. 

   The first argument, from I iv 4, says that the imagination is unreliable because its operation yields a manifest and irremediable contradiction.  The imagination produces causal beliefs, by enlivening certain ideas beyond others when certain impressions are present to the mind.  The imagination also, by following a convoluted and mistake-strewn path, produces the belief that objects continue to exist even when we do not perceive them, and exist distinct from our perception of them.  These two operations of the imagination are, Hume says, 'equally natural and necessary' (266).  And so far, so good, Hume suggests - even though the belief in continued and distinct existence has a dubious heritage, must bear the mark of the bar sinister. 

   But now an inescapably skeptical point emerges: 'in some circumstances' these 'equally natural and necessary' operations 'are directly contrary.'  Why?  Roughly because good causal reasoning tells us not to believe that secondary qualities are anything in the objects themselves, but we cannot conceive of primary qualities being in the objects themselves without conceiving of secondary qualities being in the objects themselves, so that good causal reasoning tells us that we cannot conceive of objects distinct from our perceptions.  That is to say, if we reason causally and carefully, we render the continued and distinct existence of objects inconceivable, and so a fortiori incredible; and if we can conceive of and believe in continued and distinct existence, that can only be because of a failure in causal reasoning.  The details here are obscure, and the argument might well tangle up conception and belief in fatally flawed ways.  But details and flaws aside, the gist of the argument is this: the imagination, by means of two natural and necessary operations, produces two natural and necessary beliefs.  We can have no grounds for preferring one belief to the other.  But the beliefs directly contradict each other.  This problem taints the faculty of the imagination in general, and so taints all its products (our beliefs). 

   With this first argument, if it is sound, Hume has already dealt human cognition a devastating blow; but worse is in store.  For Hume's second argument destroys the fallback position we naturally take up after the first skeptical argument (or at least the fallback position he thinks we naturally take up).  He describes that position in the following passage: 
  This contradiction in our reasoning would be more excusable, were it compensated by any degree of solidity and satisfaction in the other parts of our reasoning ....  Nothing is more curiously esquired after by the mind of man, than the causes of every phenomenon; nor are we content with knowing the immediate causes, but push on our enquiries, till we arrive at the original and ultimate principle.  We would not willingly stop before we are acquainted with that energy in the cause, by which it operates on its effect; that tie, which connects them together; and that efficacious quality, on which the tie depends.  This is our aim in all our studies and reflections .... (266)  

   The suggestion is this: if causal reasoning informs us of necessary connections, that in some measure compensates or consoles us for the skeptical discovery that the imagination produces contradictory beliefs.  That skeptical discovery undercuts the rational status of our causal beliefs; but, if we can discover necessary connections, our causal inquiries still reach deeply satisfying resultes.  

   Unfortunately, Hume notes, there are no necessary connections between events (as he has argued in I iii 14).  There is only a feeling of necessity that we experience when passing from a present impression to the idea of its customary attendant, a feeling that we mistakenly project onto events or 'objects.' 
 </I

 
   Reconciliation with Nature: Landscapes by David McMillan and Gary Wilson  
 
 MARTHA HANNA  

   David McMillan and Gary Wilson have rejected unadulterated landscapes in which we can easily indulge our love of nature for views that recognize the realities of the day.  With their recent work, each has realized that what is true encompasses more than visual description.  

   "IT COULD BE CLAIMED that the landscape photograph itself, as a viable and currently-acceptable artistic statement, is vanishing from view with the same rapidity as the natural landscape on the face of the earth.  Perhaps, in the age of TV, no one goes outside anymore" (14).  

   In her article, "The Landscape Photograph in the Postmodern Age," Kathleen Campbell despairs of the value-less philosophy represented by the landscapes that came out of the seventies.  Campbell's attitude reflects a malaise that photographers during the 1980s struggled to overcome.  The photographs of the period seemed detached; photographers searched for a means to reintroduce the personal and emotional, to make visible their engagement with the land. 

   Gary Wilson and David McMillan are two well-known photographers in Canada whose landscapes span the last two decades.  The uncanny similarity of their recent work and the subtle yet remarkable changes that the portfolios exhibit from previous work reflect a desire to openly explore and more critically reveal our relationship with the land. 

   When he began making photographs in the mid-1970s, David McMillan brought to the medium his background in the visual arts.  He had studied painting at the University of Wisconsin at Madison and graduated with a degree in Fine Arts before joining the faculty of the Manitoba School of Art in 1973.  For his first black and white photographs, McMillan created still lifes using objects of different shapes and sizes found around the home and yard.  He was interested in seeing how the composition translated to the two dimensions of the photograph.  He pursued the formal investigation of space further in a later, similarly composed, series of photographs.  To accompany each nine-inch square enlargement, McMillan produced a stereo photograph of the same scene.  The two slightly different perspectives were mounted side by side on a card, sized to fit a stereoscopic viewer.  The audience could examine the print and compare it, using the stereoscope, with the illusory three dimensions of the two photographs combined.  McMillan made evident his conceptual and perceptual investigation by strategically locating the letter D in three places within each still life. 

   This organization of objects and formal arrangement on the picture plane still predominated when he ventured beyond his home and began taking colour photographs of the urban landscape.  The landscape was not new to him: his paintings had included photo-realist outdoor scenes.  During the mid-seventies, colour photography, particularly that of the landscape, was beginning to be recognized as an art form. 1  1 In 1976, American photographer William Eggleston exhibited his colour photographs at the Museum of Modern Art.  Stephen Shore was another influential American photographer who received recognition for his colour photographs in the mid-1970s.  For a discussion of colour landscape photography, see Jussim and Lindquist-Cock 97-102. /  McMillan shifted easily from working with black and white film to colour, making photographs that turned street scenes into compositions of form and colour.  He chose views of street corners, back alleys, parking lots, and gas stations.  In one photograph taken in Banff, Alberta, the perspective is centred on a low peaked-roof building.  Cinder block walls recede from the picture's foreground, converging on either side of the small building and shaping a trapezoidal parking lot.  Two cars, one orange and one blue, are parked on either side of the building's open door.  The elements in the photograph balance the composition.  A white dog by a black dumpster in the left foreground counters the orange car parked on the extreme right.  The undulating edge of a large pool of rainwater marks off an area of dry pavement equivalent to the massive form of a mountaintop that shares the upper third of the photograph with the sky.  The puddle mirrors the central components, losing some clarity in the reflection, but gaining in colour saturation, reinforcing the complementary blue and orange. 

   GARY WILSON'S 1970s landscapes were notable for their regional distinctiveness.  A native of the Maritimes, born in Fredericton in 1951, Wilson began documenting extensively the countryside in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in 1977.  As a historical base for his exploration, he studied the work of nineteenth-century photographers who had been active in the Maritimes.  He concentrated particularly on the photographs of Isaac Erb, a turn of the century commercial photographer from Saint John.  Wilson admired the clarity and consistency of his topographical views (Craig).  In the catalogue introduction to his 1981 exhibition, "Views of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick," Gary Wilson described his photographs as documentary: "This work is an inventory of facts.  Individual photographs contain an accumulation of details which combine to describe a specific landscape.  This exhibition is an accumulation of landscapes which combine to describe a specific region."  Yet the cumulative message of the photographs is their manifestation of the political will of a person concerned about the environment.  Increasingly, Wilson's documentation focused on change in the landscape and places marked by evidence of industrial incursion.  His subjects included gravel quarries, gypsum mines, soil erosion, drainage ditches and a frozen food processing plant.  Typical among them was a photograph of a swath cut through a pine forest as the beginning of a woods road.  The earth was so churned up by heavy machinery that deep furrows and hollows held flood waters.  In another photograph, Wilson depicted the site of a gravel quarry, its scale indicated by the size of an unloading dump truck and the stifling atmosphere by the dust cloud surrounding a crusher.  The detail provided by a camera that produced a six by seven centimetre negative and the even, mid-tone greys of Wilson's print contributed to the image's concreteness and the pallor of the scene.  Elsewhere, changes were less readily apparent, but each landscape was somehow scarred, whether by the channels of erosion from a clearcut, the smoke trail from a grass fire or the tangle of fences and power lines screening the view of a cow pasture. 

   The dry, factual representation of the early work was typical of landscape photographers working during the 1970s and may have been symptomatic of their feelings of alienation.  Photographers suppressed personal expression in favour of a modernist attention to form and factual accounts.  The American photographer Robert Adams was a leader of the 1970s genre of New Topographic Landscapes, giving it both verbal and visual expression in various publications.  The name referred to the similarities with the work of the nineteenth-century geological survey photographers who documented the opening of the American frontier.  Adams's introductory remarks to his book of photographs, Denver: A Photographic Survey of the Metropolitan Area, tell of the attitudes that prevailed at the time: 

   A new city had emerged (though one that looked prematurely worn), a city much like other large urban centres across the Southwest.  To show it accurately required that I stop sorting things out by the degree to which they were picturesque; if beauty were to be discovered in Denver, it had to be on the basis of a radical faith in inclusion.  Shopping centres, junky arroyos, and commercial streets not only had to be more fully acknowledged, but acknowledged amidst the dull, hard grey of pollution. 

   I determined moreover, to stay clear of the mountains.  I distrusted the late Victorians' passion for mountaintop vistas, and decided instead to adopt the perspective of the first settlers, those who saw Colorado from the small rises of the prairie.  

   Usually made with a large-format camera, new topographic photographs were distinctive for their detail, even-toned prints, banal subjects, and concentration on man-made environments. 

   IN MCMILLAN'S PHOTOGRAPHS, cars, signs and fences represented humanity's intervention in the landscape.  Nature was shown in bits and pieces.  The tip of a mountain projected above garage roofs into a space bound by a hydro pole and wires.  Shadows criss-crossed a busy intersection as graphic reminders of the sun.  Clouds or a patch of blue sky gave nature a very small part in the primarily artificial environment.  McMillan's tightly organized and close-cropped images visually exaggerated the urban conditions with cluttered scenes layering objects and colours. 

   Two photographs taken in less built-up environments stand apart both in the depiction of nature and in the more traditional spatial view imposed.  A very old tree dominates one.  It has aggregated a variety of plant life, but is itself leafless and possibly at the end of its years.  McMillan took the other photograph at the forested edge of a construction site.  The pile of earth heaped up beside a hole creates the impression of a gravesite, suggesting the impending death of nature. 

   In retrospect, these photographs, taken in 1981, anticipate the shift in McMillan's recent work.  He has moved away from contemporary suburbia, literally stepping back from his subject to provide a fuller view.  Civilization's impact on nature is lessened, giving nature a more prominent role, whether in fact or by implication.  Even in photographs of towns or industrial locations, nature's form, colour, and atmosphere set the tone.  The rolling landscape of West Virginia offers pleasant memories to a tourist, despite the ugliness and environmental threat of the garbage dump with which it shares the frame.  In Chester, West Virginia, mist rising from the river mitigates what would otherwise be an industrial scene. 

   SIMILARLY, IN HIS NEW SERIES, Gary Wilson neutralizes the impact of industrialization on the land.  The overall impression has changed.  His outlook is broader, his subject less specific.  Addressing the ambivalence of his documentation, Wilson began to put his photographs in context.  "Rather than a journalistic approach to subject matter, requiring an extensive literary form and 'reductionist' conclusion, the symbolic possibilities of certain photographs could be effectively 'placed' within a body of work to help in its reading.  In this way my concern over abusive land-use, and the fear of quick sentimental and ahistorical interpretations of man / nature interaction might be included with the general optimism of the project" (Wilson, Letter, November 1985).  Signs of economic growth still appear in the photograph of a clearcut but the enduring strength of the land, symbolized by a lone tree that survives the devastation of the hillside, offers hope and represents the power of nature hidden in the previous work. 

   Along with environmental concerns, nature itself appeared to activate the photographers's response during the 1980s.  In the US, the catastrophic affect of natural disasters, particularly the eruption of Mount St Helens, served to awaken photographers to nature's explosive power.  Photographs taken by Frank Gohlke and others emerged as a strong counterpoint to the overwhelming culture of the new topographic landscapes. 

   BOTH DAVID MCMILLAN AND GARY WILSON clearly demonstrate their great love of nature.  In these photographs, nature is not simply acted upon but presents itself in dramatic ways: in a rainbow, in the dark cloud of an impending storm, and in the flood waters caused by an ice jam in the St John River. 

   With nature's strength comes evidence of our own vulnerability.  Ultimately we are surrendered to the land, as both photographers remind us, one with a view of a pioneer cemetery in Coldstream, New Brunswick, the other of a historic burial plot in northwestern Mississippi.  Their recent photographs convey our physically and spiritually complex relationship with the land, and how the symbiosis is embedded in our psyche.  Spiritual overtones live in the clarity of light reminiscent of luminist paintings.  Wilson's photograph, Meduxnekeag River at Jackson Falls is an all-encompassing view, taken from a point above the falls.  The people fishing at the edge of the river are so small in relation to the landscape that they become simply details in the scene. 

   The depth of attention McMillan gives to certain objects, places or moments imbues his photographs with metaphysical meaning.  The elements of a fence post shown from a distorted angle, graffiti, a view veiled by a grove of trees all combine with the transient moment of a ship's passing to imply a sense of otherness.  McMillan releases the photographs from a mainly informative function and leaves them open to poetic interpretation.  These photographs are not symbolic in a way that metaphorically equates human and natural forms or qualities.  Nor are they analogies for the fundamental structures that govern all life.  Instead of having such timeless qualities, the sensitivity of Wilson and McMillan's photographs stems more from references specifically linked to time and experience. 
 
   Wilson alludes to time through change, by focusing on elements old and new.  Man-made structures come and go in relatively rapid succession.  A Halifax city block is slated for re-development, a heritage home is ravaged by fire.  The oil rig in Halifax harbour is already a historic monument.  A giant tree in the centre on one photograph marks time as a constant in the changing facade of successive historic views of the street. 
 
   The photograph, Elm (Chapel Street) Woodstock, Carleton Co, New Brunswick, could depict a street in any number of towns in North America.  For Wilson, who grew up in Woodstock, it may have personal relevance but it stikes a chord in most viewer.  Signs relate to the past: the architecture, the ample spacing of the houses, the perennity of the elm.  Given its size, the tree must have been significant in the profile of the street and possibly of the town, serving as a point of reference in the history and geography.  Its importance is emphasized in the photograph by its centrality, by its grandeur in relation to the other objects and vegetation, and by its near perfect form silhouetted against the sky.  As the main element in the photograph, the tree influences the nostalgic character and is chiefly responsible for the warm feelings aroused by the picture.  Closer inspection brings the realization that the tree is dead.  Ironically, the photograph also contrasts the denuded elm with the smaller trees in full leaf.  The photograph's negative aspect, that the tree we are looking at is probably a victim of Dutch Elm disease, is more difficult for us to contemplate. 
 


     Enlightenment and Academe: 
   The University in the Eighteenth Century  
  P.B. WOOD

   Given the special relationship assiduously cultivated in recent years by Britain and the United States, it is hardly surprising that during the last decade Margaret Thatcher has done more for American universities than anyone since Hitler.  Having created a thoroughly unhealthy climate within the British university system and driven many talented academics into lucrative exile in the us, Mrs Thatcher can at least now rest content with the thought that the successful export of scholarly expertise helps to silence potential critics of her brave new world, to improve Britain's ailing balance of trade, and to trim public expenditure.  It is therefore highly ironic that amid the tribal chants of "Market Forces Rule OK" and the educational hooliganism of Thatcher's Tory supporters, there has been a veritable renaissance in Britain of the study of the history of universities, which has enriched and sometimes transformed our knowledge of European academic life since the foundation of the first universities in Salerno, Paris, Montpellier, and Bologna in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.  

   Prior to the late 1970s, the golden age of university history in Britain was unquestionably the nineteenth century.  One needs only point to the volumes penned by Hastings Rashdall on the medieval European universities, those by J.B. Mulinger on Cambridge, those by Alexander Bower and Sir Alexander Grant on Edinburgh, or the series of Oxford college histories published between 1898 and 1903 to see that the Victorian era witnessed a remarkable flowering of British scholarship dedicated to the development of institutions of higher learning throughout western Europe.  But since then, the field has had a more chequered career.  For much of this century, a large proportion of the literature produced has been either anecdotal or antiquarian in character, and often published to celebrate institutional milestones.  While it would be churlish to deny that at least some of this commemorative work has been highly valuable, it would also be true to say that until recently comparatively little historical attention was paid to such topics as the prosopography of student bodies and of the professoriate, the changes in university curricula, or the frequently unedifying realm of academic politics; and it was only in the 1960s that the study of university history took on a more analytical edge.  Books edited or written by George Davie, Hugh Kearney, Sheldon Rothblatt, Lawrence Stone, and E.G.W. Bill signalled renewed vigour, and the subsequent appearance of important studies by Robert Anderson, Davie, and John Gascoigne among others has confirmed the scholarly health of the field.  As if to consolidate this revival, and mark the emergence of yet another academic sub-discipline, the annual History of Universities was launched in 1981 by the late Charles Schmitt, following a highly successful conference on the theme held at the Warburg Institute in London in 1978, and the continued vitality of this journal attests to the flourishing state of university history (as opposed to the universities themselves) in Britain. 

   So too in their different ways do the fifth volume of The History of the University of Oxford, which covers the period c. 1688-1800, and Laurence Brockliss's meticulously crafted French Higher Education in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries.  The Oxford History is something of a curate's egg, for it is made up of 32 essays of variable quality covering a wide variety of topics.  Historiographically, the volume is highly traditional in its focus, since the bulk of the contributions deal with such themes as religion and politics in the university, while the study of student life, for example, is conspicuous by its absence.  Nonetheless, a number of the chapters, like those by the late G.V. Bennett on the "rage of party" in Oxford in the period 1688-1714, are of a high standard, and it must be said that the University - supported project from which the History derives reflects a refreshing and perhaps even enlightened institutional sense of the value of university history.  Brockliss's monograph, on the other hand, is more in tune with recent historiographical trends, and hence deals with topics like student life and the wider cultural significance of the university curriculum in the ancien regime.  As befits a work dealing with France, there are even a number of maps illustrating the geographical distribution of universities and colleges drawn in typical Annales fashion.  While the Oxford volume is sometimes impressionistic and occasionally lacking in analytical rigour, Brockliss combines close archival research with a broad historical vision, and his book exemplifies the considerable virtues of the research on the development of European universities currently being produced by British scholars. 

  I 

   Thanks in part to the memoirs of Edward Gibbon, the dominant image of eighteenth-century Oxford is one of professorial negligence and intellectual torpor.  Looking back on his brief sojourn at Magdalen College in 1752-53 Gibbon condemned the "narrow, lazy, and oppressive" spirit prevalent in the two English universities, and affirmed in a memorable passage that "[t]o the University of Oxford I acknowledge no obligation; and she will as cheerfully renounce me for a son, as I am willing to disclaim her for a mother.  I spent fourteen months at Magdalen College; they proved ... the most idle and unprofitable of my whole life" (29-30).  Adam Smith, who was a Snell Exhibitioner at Balliol from 1740 until 1746, echoed Gibbon's harsh judgment.  In The Wealth of Nations, Smith contended that the system of class fees common in the Scottish universities encouraged professors to exert themselves in their teaching, and he contrasted the happy effects of competition in the academic market place with the dismal state of universities in which the professoriate was supported primarily by fixed salaries.  Such a method of payment, Smith argued, promoted idleness, and he observed that "[i]n the university of Oxford, the greater part of the public professors have, for these many years, given up altogether even the pretence of teaching" (I: 247; compare Reid, "Statistical Account" 1: 229-31).  Oxford also came in for some sharp criticism from another Glasgow academic, George Jardine, who lectured on logic at the University from 1774 until his death in 1827.  In his Outlines of Philosophical Education, Jardine challenged the smug self-satisfaction of the apologists for the ancient seats of learning south of the Tweed, and argued that the tutorial system employed by the English and Irish universities stifled the intellectual development of the young.  Like Smith, Jardine underlined the beneficial effects of competition or "emulation," and insisted that "all the faculties of the mind are exerted, and powers unused before, are awakened into life and activity" in the atmosphere of the (Scottish) lecture hall (464).  

   The French universities did not fare much better in the eyes of the enlightened.  While residing at La Fleche in 1735, David Hume remarked to an English correspondent: "As to a celebrated Professor, I do not know, if there is such to be met with at present in any part of France, especially for the Sciences, in which generally the French are much inferior to our own Countrymen" (Mossner 32).  Smith too was critical, claiming in The Wealth of Nations that the French universities illustrated the pernicious effects of ecclesiastical and political control over academic appointments (2: 247-48).  Predictably, Voltaire sniped at the universities as well.  Like Gibbon, he associated them with monkishness and barbarism, and Voltaire contrasted the professoriate (as well as the Academicians of his time) with "the true scholars shut up in their studies ... [who] have nearly all been persecuted" (274).  But perhaps the most damning attack on French higher education came in Jean D'Alembert's article "College," in the third volume of the Encyclopedie.  For D'Alembert there took a very dim view of the benefits of a college education: 

   [U]n jeune homme apres avoir passe dans un college dix annees, qu'on doit mettre au nombre de plus precieuses de sa vie, en sort, lorsqu'il a le mieux employe son tems, avec la connoissance tres-imparfaite d'une langue morte, avec des preceptes de Rhetorique & des principes de Philosophie qu'il doit ta; cher d'oublier; souvent avec une corruption de moeurs dont l'alteration de la sante est la moindre suite; quelquefois avec des principes d'une devotion mal-entendue; mais plus ordinairement avec une connoissance de la Religion si superficielle, qu'elle succombe a la premiere conversation impie, ou a la premiere lecture dangereuse. (635)  

   The philosophes on both sides of the Channel were, therefore, largely hostile to traditional educational institutions like Oxford or the various French universities, but were their criticisms entirely just? 

  II 

   In order to answer this question, I want to juxtapose the intellectual record of Oxford and the French universities in the eighteenth century as presented in the volumes under review, with that of their counterparts in Scotland.  For the assessments of Oxford and the French schools quoted above contrast markedly with contemporary perceptions of the Scottish colleges (and not just those of the Scots themselves).  Recent work on the cultural milieu of eighteenth-century Scotland has shown that the universities of North Britain helped nurture the Scottish Enlightenment, which is hardly surprising in view of the fact that such leading lights as Joseph Black, William Cullen, Adam Ferguson, John Millar, Thomas Reid, and Adam Smith were all members of the professoriate.  Brockliss himself draws attention to the need for such a comparative dimension when discussing the history of the curriculum, and in what follows I shall engage in mapping the kind of "curricular topography of the early-modern university" which he calls for (Brockliss 448). 

   Let us consider first the cultivation of classical learning.  Although the philosophes are sometimes seen as championing the cause of the moderns rather than that of the ancients, they in fact generally subscribed to the common view that a knowledge of the classics was necessary in the republic of letters.  Gibbon, for example, went up to Oxford hoping to master Greek and Latin, only to have his hopes shattered by the indifference of his tutors, while D'Alembert claimed that Latin should be the language of philosophy (Gibbon 30, 34-37; D'Alembert, Preliminary Discourse 93).  Indeed, Peter Gay has argued that during the Enlightenment the philosophes drew a good deal of inspiration from the authors of pagan antiquity (2: 31-203).  Some of Gay's claims may be difficult to document, but Brockliss's findings at least corroborate Gay's insistence on the centrality of the classics in the Weltanschauung of the age, for even though the teaching of Greek seems to have declined in France during the second half of the eighteenth century, in the ancien regime students spent a good deal of their six years at university studying Latin.  Furthermore, they were expected to become fluent speakers as well as stylish writers, because Latin continued to be used as the language of classroom instruction in virtually all of their courses.  Similarly, at Oxford the classics formed the core of the formal curriculum, though here too Greek became an increasingly marginal subject as the century wore on, and the extent to which English displaced Latin in lectures and tutorials is unclear (Sutherland and Mitchell 513-33).  

   The classics fared somewhat differently in Scotland, in so far as there was a revival of Greek scholarship in the early eighteenth century which was linked to the philosophical and mathematical interests of men such as Francis Hutcheson and his Glasgow colleague Robert Simson, and the study of Latin occupied a subsidiary, though nonetheless important, place in the curriculum of the Scottish universities.  Thus students usually studied Latin and Greek most intensively at the beginning of their course, and after their second year they switched their attention primarily to mathematics, and to natural and moral philosophy.  Moreover, from roughly the 1740s onwards their lectures were largely in English, though Latin was often used on public occasions (Reid, Philosophical Orations).  Of greater significance is the fact that the professors responsible for instruction in Greek and Latin indulged in philosophical or historical reflections on the materials they dealt with in their advanced classes, so that their students were introduced to topics in political theory or to conjectural history in the context of their classical studies (Emerson 69-70).  Consequently, the classical education received by students at the Scottish universities was closer in character to that given in France, and was probably more closely linked to the other branches of learning covered in the curriculum than was the case at Oxford.  Having completed their courses on the languages, literature, and culture of the ancient world, students in eighteenth-century Scotland normally proceeded to the heart of the curriculum, namely the study of moral and natural philosophy.  In The Democratic Intellect, George Davie contended that the distinctive feature of the Scottish university system prior to the Anglicising reforms of the nineteenth century was the philosophical focus of undergraduate education.  Subsequent research has largely confirmed Davie's intuitions, and Brockliss's work, along with the relevant essays in the Oxford History, serves to underline the contrast between the Scottish experience and the patterns of instruction in France and at Oxford.  In Scotland, the philosophy course typically encompassed what we would now call the natural sciences and the sciences of man and society, so that the arts student would commonly attend (with minor variations) lectures on mechanics, pneumatics, electricity and magnetism, optics, astronomy, the philosophy of mind, logic, rhetoric, ethics, jurisprudence, and politics, which would be supplemented by prelections on mathematics, and in some cases on natural and civil history.  
 </I

     Past Pleasures: New Film Histories  
   CATHERINE RUSSELL  

   Louis Lumiere, one of the inventors of the cinematographe, described the device that projected moving pictures as "an invention without a future."  Anticipating the debates that would plague this curious phenomenon throughout its existence, Lumiere saw the historical limits and conditions that would define his invention.  What is it for?  What should it be for?  Who uses it and why?  While the numerous histories of the cinema that have been produced since 1914 (only 19 years after the Lumieres' and Thomas Edison's first demonstrations) have supplied ample lists of titles, names, and dates, these kind of questions are often quelled by the spurious epithet: entertainment. 

   In the last 10 years, increased interest in film history has been only partly due to the recognition of the poverty of existing film histories.  It is also a response to the ahistoricism of the poststructuralist critical theory that dominated cinema studies in the I970s.  The turn to history on the part of many film scholars is in many cases an attempt to integrate some of the insights provided by textual theory into the lived history of film texts.  History in this sense refers to the constitution of audiences in terms of class, gender, and race, conditions of reception and funding, and extracinematic culture.  Only through consideration of the consumption of film texts can "the cinema" as a social phenomenon be adequately addressed.  And yet historians with these ambitions do not carry out statistical analyses of box office receipts and attendance figures (although interesting work has been done on the urban geography of nickelodeons).  For the most part, the practice of such historians remains narrative analysis, but rather than identifying the redeeming features of a given work, their aim is to identify the spectator addressed by the texts of a given period and the institutionalization of that address in film genres. 

   Two histories of German cinema, corresponding to the two "high points" of that national cinema - the films of the Weimar Republic (1920s) and those of the 1970s - are especially acute studies of the engagement of contemporary audiences with the films.  Patrice Petro's Joyless Streets: Women and Melodramatic Representation in Weimar Germany is a much needed antidote to the prevailing historicization of German Expressionism as a prophecy of the Third Reich and to histories that canonized great-but-anxious artist-heroes eventually exiled to Hollywood.  Thomas Elsaesser's lengthy study of an equally brief moment in German history fills in the background and the spaces among the three directors, Werner Herzog, R.W. Fassbinder, and Wim Wenders, who made "New German Cinema" an international phenomenon.  In both books, the abyss of the Nazi period and its difficult aftermath, in which film production was little more than propaganda (during) and American colonization (after), underlines the urgency of defining the German spectator outside the overwhelming mystifications of fascism. 

   Two books on American cinema, although perhaps not "histories" in a conventional sense, isolate groups of Hollywood films that delineate histories within the larger history of American studio production.  Rick Altman and Robert Lang manage, with different degrees of success, to trace out histories of American desires in the contexts of the Hollywood musical and melodrama respectively.  If film in the US can be handily dismissed as "entertainment," it is the responsibility of the historian to find out what entertainment has meant at different times.  For what desires does it portend to offer satisfaction? And whose desires are they? The two studies in question take very different approaches to genre, but in both cases the differences within genre films and the subtle variations on a narrative formula demonstrate shifts in modes of address that correspond to different historical spectators. 

   While all four of these histories embrace feminist cultural analysis, Petro's study of Weimar cinema, as its title suggests, takes the most systematically feminist approach.  Her project is to recover an inscription of female spectatorship from a body of films that has been until now discussed as a cinema produced by men for men.  No one, not even Petro, would argue with Siegfried Kracauer's observation that the male Weimar protagonists tended to be weak, passive, and anxiety-ridden.  Indeed Petro expands on the androgyny and homoeroticism of many of these films, but rather than situating the representational and narrative instability within the context of modernism, as critics since Kracauer have done, she suggests that these films might have provided an inscription of "emancipation" for female viewers.  This is not to argue for any actual relief from patriarchal oppression for the women of Germany in the 1920s, but to point to a place where their desires might have found representation. 

   Although the trajectory of Joyless Streets is towards the analysis of four key films of the 1920s (one of them titled Joyless Street), Petro sets up these analyses with an examination of the gender politics of the period, which of course informed other discourses besides the cinema.  In the cultural theories of Kracauer, Walter Benjamin, and Martin Heidegger (three important predecessors of the postwar Frankfurt School), German cities, especially Berlin, were consistently described as female.  Moreover, as these theorists tackled the transformation of vision and the gaze that the industrial metropolis was affecting, the female viewer came to symbolize a distracted and fragmented mode of perception.  Women were becoming a highly visible presence in Weimar Germany, not only at the movies, but in the workplace and on the street.  But they also remained at home, fulfilling more traditional roles.  Petro argues against the prevailing conception of "mass culture" - a term that acquired currency precisely in the Weimar context - and for a culture that included not only women, but many different kinds of women, whose place within a rapidly changing environment was negotiated within a politics of spectatorship. 

   In the illustrated press, a genre that boomed between the wars, images of women tended to fall into two categories that appeared in both left- and right-wing publications.  The first and perhaps the most familiar icon is that of the New Woman, the female consumer in highly masculinized attire.  In magazines such as Die Dame, these fashion layouts would have been addressed to a female reader, matching her new buying power with a loss of sexuality.  The second representation was that of the proletarian mother, typically pregnant and drawn or lithographed in round, dark lines.  Adhering to melodramatic conventions, these images participated in a discourse of pathos, which in the leftist press (Internationale Arbeiterhilfe and Arbetier Illustrierte Zeitung) was rhetorically opposed to the bourgeois New Woman, situating anti-capitalist and reproductive values on the site of the female body.  "The address to female voters emphasizes class contradiction, whereas the address to male voters calls for class reconciliation" (139), suggesting that, when addressed to female readers, the iconography of gender takes on meanings other than "male anxiety and fear" (110). 

   The address to women was therefore paradoxical; on one hand women were the symbols of political and economic "liberation," and on the other they represented the suffering of the underclasses.  In the gothic fantasy films of the early 1920s, such as Nosferatu and The Cabinet of Dr Caligari, feminine sexuality lurks behind the hysteria of mise en scene and violence; the deep anxiety of the male characters is almost always released on the terror of virginal brides.  Not surprisingly, it is in the figure of the prostitute that these two discourses of modernity and pathos come together, and such figures abound in the Weimar cinema.  The main actresses of the period - Marlene Dietrich, Louise Brooks, Asta Nielson, and Henny Porten - frequently played women who, in the latest fashions (often tending toward androgyny), used their bodies in desperate, and almost always failed, attempts to survive in a cruel, cruel world.  Petro argues that the visual excess of these silent films (lighting, staging, pacing, and violence that strain the bounds of realism)is born of the impossible contradiction between the iconic New Woman and the poor chances of her social mobility.  In melodrama, the pathos of women's contradictory situation is realized in concrete situations. 

   If mass culture was characterized as female and if modernism was the province of male anxiety, then the politics of representation were indeed the politics of gender in Weimar Germany.  The presence of women at the movies in Weimar and elsewhere in the 1920s was in many respects their entry into official culture.  The production of "women's films," films with female protagonists who suffer and usually die, and their public exhibition provided the "conditions of visibility" for women: they were addressed as spectators and desiring subjects.  Petro might be accused of excluding class and sex-bound male spectators from the pleasures that she identifies in Weimar cinema, and yet the work stands as an exemplary model of historiography.  She manages to acquire some distance from the evaluative discourses of modernism and mass culture, but not by moving away from the canons of German Expressionism and Kammerspiel street realism).  In order to point to textual expressions of frustrated desires for social and sexual emancipation, she attends to the social representations that underscore the formal innovations of some very well-known films. 

   However much one might admire Petro's project in Joyless Streets, it is hard not to have lingering doubts about the audiences that she assumes for the films.  Elsaesser's New German Cinema also has this problem.  Where Petro cites a 1914 dissertation to support her claim that "a vast number of filmgoers in Germany were women" in the 1920s (xx), Elsaesser relies rather heavily on the writing of Michael Rutschky (particularly an essay called "Dreaming the Real" ) for his characterization of the Bohemian politicos who supposedly frequented German cinemas in the 1970s.  Neither source is either authoritative or terribly convincing, and yet it seems to be necessary for both historians that they demonstrate the empirical existence of those spectators who, they claim, are addressed by the texts in question.  One would almost prefer that they stuck to the textual evidence alone if they were not prepared to offer empirical confirmation of their findings.  It may not be possible to know with any certainty the make-up of historical audiences in terms of gender, class, or political orientation, but if film history is going to move away from narratives of great works and to be able to account for the cinema in its larger sense, it is essential that audiences be accounted for by some means. 

   The New German Cinema, Elsaesser argues, can only be described as a coherent entity in terms of its address to an historically specific audience.  In North America, postwar German film has been represented by only a handful of directors and very few films made before 1975.  And yet it was in 1962 that a group of German filmmakers signed the Oberhausen Manifesto, simultaneously tolling the death of the "old cinema" and instituting a system of federal subsidies for German film that continues to the present day.  The Young German Film, as Elsaesser calls the work that immediately followed Oberhausen, had a "false start," though.  Its proponents fell into two distinct sets: those (e.g., Kluge, Straub) who challenged the Hollywood norm so radically that they antagonized their potential audience, and those who fell too easily into the Hollywood pattern and used the generous subsidies for poor imitations of the American competition.  The New German cinema did not come into its own until filmmakers were able to find a middle ground between the avant-garde and the commercial cinema and were able to address an emergent group of spectators in the wake of the late 1960s student movements. 

   If Weimar cinema was torn between mass culture and modernism, the New German Cinema was characterized by a similar split.  As a subsidized industry, film was (officially) designated a cultural product that might revamp a debilitated national cinema, but from the outset this cinema was an "author's cinema" (Autoren), built around the efforts of individual directors.  The duality of art and popular culture, further institutionalized in the crucial role of television in this revamped industry, hinged on the figure of the "visionary" artist hero who became him or herself a commodity in the culture industry.  
 </I

     The 1989-90 Toronto Theatre Season  
  RONALD BRYDEN 

   "Toronto could be a very good theatre town," a new resident said to me last winter, "if only it would stop worrying whether it's a world-class one." I could see what she meant.  For several seasons now the dominant note of the city's theatrical culture has been anxiety, which notoriously impairs most kinds of performance.  First there was the anxiety whether home-made Canadian produce could stand up to such spectacular invading juggernauts as Les Miserables and The Phantom of the Opera.  That led to some unfriendly notices of the musicals when they arrived, which in turn uncovered odd, congested knots of paranoia among the builders and boosters who rattled gold chains at each other at The Phantom's opening galas.  To knock the glitziest theatrical offering in the city's history, they complained to the editor of The Globe and Mail, was treason to the city itself, its manifest destiny to become the Dallas of the North.  Any nay-sayer questioning Toronto's right to share long-running Lloyd Webber musicals with London, New York, and Tokyo should be ridden out of town on a rail, while we still have rails. 

   Both concerns were answered, in different ways, by the startling success of George Walker's local comedy Love and Anger, a glitzless lampoon of those movers and shakers who would make Toronto, as someone in the play put it, a place satisfying only to baseball fans and real estate dealers.  Under the probosces of the singing mastodons, this racked up the longest run so far recorded by a straight Canadian play (its nearest rival, John Krizanc's Tamara, presumably may be classed as bent) in the city's annals.  Its apotheosis was its transfer by Garth Drabinsky, The Phantom's local franchisee, to the large auditorium of the St Lawrence Centre for a commercial run.  But this success, as success does, opened new vistas of anxiety.  Could Walker's modest six-character effort live up to its publicity, or even cover the cost of the campaign that blazoned it on half the bus shelters in town?  It is one thing to sell 300 seats for 30 weeks in the unthreateningly tacky Factory Theatre, out among the warehouses of the garment district; another to sell 900 for 10 weeks in a spiffy, plum-carpeted civic showcase.  And suppose it did succeed there?  Might that not be more ominous still?  Might it not signify the fulfilment of every anti-Free Trade patriot's nightmare: that to meet the challenge of American mass culture, our Canadian arts might shed their shy, specific charm and learn the blatant trick of vulgar popularity? 

   It might have eased the Toronto theatre's anxieties had it paused to consider that it was already world class in its worries.  Like London, Paris, and most western capitals, it has suffered the pains of subsidy withdrawal during a decade of Thatcherite retrenchment in public expenditure.  The thriving theatrical culture spread across the country by the Canada Council's first 20 years of nurturing has had its milk ration cut, as Mrs Thatcher cut that of Britain's schoolchildren, and been told to get out and hustle the private sector for sponsorships, the arts bureaucrat's euphemism for advertising.  Dismay and confusion were inevitable, as a theatre bred up to pursue art for the sake of art and national expression tried to learn how to blend those aims with the wiles of showbiz and the notions of good taste that obtain in corporate PR departments.  No wonder the face of Toronto's theatre of late has sometimes recalled that of the wife in Thurber's cartoon, a distressed matron near the end of her tether, at whom her husband has thrown the sardonic question: "And how do you propose to live?  By your wits?" 

   Fortunately the Toronto stage has at least one wit to live by.  George Walker's remarkable success holds useful lessons for his co-workers, both in how to do things right in a mixed theatrical economy and in how to look out for what may go wrong.  A lot went right for Love and Anger as popular entertainment, but a few things may have gone wrong for it as a political statement.  As a play, it is an organic growth of subsidized theatre, its form and language rooted in the complex of attitudes that make for public support to the arts.  Yet somehow a larger commercial audience that rejects most of those attitudes took the play to its bosom.  Did it convert them?  Did they not believe it meant it?  Or did they just hear it wrong?  Did it not say what it meant loudly and clearly enough? 

   On the face of it, the last question should be absurd.  Walker, who has taken to directing his plays himself, does so on the apparent first principle that everyone should shout as loudly as possible, as actors used to on old radio comedy shows.  It would be nice to think that he does this from modesty about his skills as a comic writer, a fear that his wit would fall dead unless packaged in a generalized roar of raucous good humour.  But the evidence suggests rather that it is part of a systematic commitment to populism: a belief that to expect audiences to appreciate the acting skill that points a deftly turned witticism, or the skill of the writing itself, is to trade in elitism, excluding the audience that enjoys the Canadian Air Farce.  As a result, he writes scripts whose affinities are with Wilde, Orton, and Ronald Firbank and entrusts them to casts whose models are Wayne, Schuster, Fibber McGee and Molly. 

   This systematic populism runs deep into the texture of his writing.  In the first full-length academic study of Walker's work, Dr Catherine Smith demonstrates the parodic use his plays make, apart and together, of two of the most popular genres of the old Hollywood: the film noir thriller that walked the mean streets of America and the crazy family comedies of Frank Capra.  Love and Anger, like his previous Toronto comedies Better Living, Beautiful City, and Criminals in Love, draws on both of them.  The Toronto that lies beyond Petie Maxwell's basement law office is clearly as violent and corrupt as the Los Angeles of The Blue Dahlia or The Big Sleep, but the tiny ad hoc family he gathers around him to fight it is as amiably demented as the Sycamores of Capra's You Can't Take It With You.  

   The problem with this is that the two genres build from incompatible premises.  In Capra's comic world there can be no real villains.  The benign madness of his crazy families is to believe everyone basically good, deep down, when liberated from the rat-race of capitalist competition.  The happy endings that prove them saner than the societies around them win the villains over to love, leisure, and apple pie.  The premise of the film noir is the antithesis of this.  The secret chivalry of its soiled, disillusioned heroes is to go on pitting themselves, hopelessly and romantically as Don Quixote, against a world that every morning brings forth a new crop of evil, endemic and ineradicable, for them to challenge again.  If there were any real chance of their winning more than compromised local victories that turn sour in the mouth, they wouldn't be heroes and the young wouldn't collect Humphrey Bogart posters. 

   This contradiction works against what I think Walker wants Love and Anger to say.  Its goodies are Petie Maxwell, a former Bay Street shark born again to champion life's minnows - a poor man's Clayton Ruby, so to speak - and the cellarful of eccentric waifs and strays he has conscripted as disciples.  The baddies are John "Babe" Connor, proprietor of "a fascist rag that panders to everything weak and uncertain and uninformed in the human race" with bimbos on page three and sports everywhere else, and his lawyer, a boyish charmer from Rosedale and Upper Canada College who will do anything for a developer's fee and lunch at the Granite Club.  They're monsters, but on the same stage as Maxwell and his "little people" they become fun monsters, impossible to take seriously: so outrageously villainous that, in broad, funny performances by Benedict Campbell and Hardee T. Lineham, they seem almost cute.  It's as if Walker's love for his city compelled him to make even its bad guys endearing.  To be sure, his ending says "But seriously, folks ...." The little people win a local victory, Maxwell dies promising to start younger next time, and the monsters escape to continue towering over the skyline like King Kong, the Sky-dome their jacuzzi.  But as we all know, in the popular imagination the old Hollywood understood so well, it's the giant ape that commands the audience's sneaking admiration.  So too here. 

   It's hard to resist the suspicion that Love and Anger's success (it's said that lawyers packed the Factory Theatre nightly, in their suits) may have been due to a misapprehension.  Given its noisy, driving production, and some spirited comic acting not only by the villains but by Claire Coulter as Maxwell's reluctant secretary, a granite Torontonian handmaid of the goddess Decorum, and Nancy Beatty as her loosely hinged sister, it may have been all too easy to mistake the play for a "roast" - that peculiar North American bonding ritual in which a banquet hall of middle-aged males in dinner jackets proclaim their love for one of their number by alternately embracing and insulting him.  It was interesting to observe at the St Lawrence Centre, where the production's boisterousness was diluted by the larger space it had to fill, that the play became less funny and more witty.  The harsh edge of Walker's writing cut through the muffling geniality of his staging.  But that may have been why, even after that deluge of publicity, the performance I saw was only two-thirds full, as compared with the sell-out house into whose back row I squeezed at the Factory Theatre. 

   The anxieties of operating in a mixed theatrical economy, trying to reconcile the aesthetic of subsidized theatre with the taste of mainstream commercial audiences, almost sank that brave experiment, the Canadian Stage Company.  Carrying forward a heavy deficit from its previous seasons, it needed to play safe, which in the theatre means offering known quantities.  But its artistic director, Guy Sprung, preferred the risk and excitement of staging new work, hoping to astound the city by discovering unknown Canadian genius.  The result was that it wobbled uneasily, and for the most part unsuccessfully, between the subsidized theatre's traditional appeal to patriotism - don't just look for entertainment, buy Canadian and take life seriously - and attempts to compete with the waltzing scenery and falling chandeliers of the multi-national spectaculars, bred by Cats out of Nicholas Nickleby and Trevor Nunn's resolve to woo into theatres the audiences for rock concerts and TV costume serials. 

   Thus a mainstage revival of Fire, the rock-and-gospel musical that had made its way from Thunder Bay, Vancouver, and Edmonton to a sell-out run at Theatre Passe-Muraille in 1988, fell between the two stools of selling a noisy, mindless good time and maintaining a thoughtful Canadian distance from the Bible Belt's favourite forms of pious and profane ecstasy.  For most of the evening, we viewed dispassionately the accumulating resemblances between the white-shoed fervour of a TV evangelist much like Jimmy Swaggart and the down-and-dirty abandon of a piano-wrecker even more like Swaggart's cousin Jerry Lee Lewis.  Then with a blaze of amplifiers the show would lose its anthropological cool and invite us to surrender to the physical excitement that is the goal of a rock concert, gospel tent, or Broadway musical. 

   It might have had a better chance had it been able to muster more than 10 bodies on stage to match the sense of occasion whomped up electronically by "Good Golly, Miss Molly" and "Great Balls of Fire." Ted Dykstra, in the Jerry Lee Lewis role, almost seemed to double their number when he was in evidence, leaping and somersaulting about the set like a handful of firecrackers.  But when he left the scene, we were back with a decent, serious, low-powered Canadian comment on the incestuous links between evangelical religion in the southern US and the unholy joys of rock-and-roll.  For the show to succeed, it needed to be American and not a comment: telling its American story with whole-hearted complicity and breast-beating guilt, not flattering its audience with a sense of how exotic and alien these passions were. 
 </I
   In the middle of nowhere, at the centre of all things, 
   Dance to the music of time  
  by Michael Crabb 

   For those with a taste for statistics the first fifty years of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet could be counted in numbers of toeshoes beaten to a pulp, of cities visited on five continents, of original ballets created, and of disasters that have periodically challenged the 26-member company's legendary stamina and pure grit.  Impressive, but meaningless without the story of the remarkable human beings who have consistently breathed life into an institution that by all common-sense reckoning should never have happened. 

   First, let's take Winnipeg.  No one would imply that the Prairie capital was a cultural wasteland when those redoubtable and very English ladies Gwenneth Lloyd and Betty Farrally arrived in 1938.  There was music, there was theatre; above all there was a burning civic pride.  Even so, great ballet companies have traditionally emerged in larger, richer, more cosmopolitan and more strategically placed cities.  Winnipeg was a long way from anywhere and even now when curious foreigners reach for an atlas to discover exactly where it is they must be struck by the seeming improbability of such a city giving birth to a vigorous cultural flower. 

   Second, let's take Canada.  Until Lloyd and Farrally decided to make a go of things in their adopted home nobody else had succeeded in establishing a permanent ballet troupe here.  There were attempts, of course - most notably by Boris Volkoff in Toronto - but none that had the originality and vigour of the new Winnipegers.  Canada in 1938, though receptive enough to distinguished ballet companies from abroad, was still unfertile soil for the growth of an indigenous dance culture. 

   Lloyd and Farrally turned both conditions to their advantage.  If Winnipeg was isolated, they could forge a company that suited their environment; a robust troupe that would appeal to the people, that could dance ballets about wheat and hydro-electricity as easily as it could recreate the elegance of traditional toeshoes and tutus.  If Canadians seemed content to patronize imported dance attractions, Lloyd and Farrally would deliver something different, something more attuned to the particular energy of a young, ambitious nation. 

   It took more than Lloyd and Farrally to bring these dreams to fruition.  Although the Winnipeg Ballet (it picked up the useful "Royal" title in 1953) can trace its formal origins to 1939 it could not call itself fully professional until a decade later.  By then rival Torontonians were beginning to formulate plans for their own "Canadian" ballet company.  (To this day Celia Franca, founder of the National Ballet of Canada, maintains that on her arrival in 1950 she was assured that the Winnipeg Ballet had ceased operations.) 

   A tenuous first decade proved that homegrown dance could find a footing against such odds as chronic lack of money and an inadequate supply of well-trained dancers.  Even the disastrous fire of June 1954, which destroyed most of the RWB's material assets - including the notes of Lloyd's many choreographies - could not consume the ambitions of those who stayed to clear up the mess.  This crippling, almost paralyzing disaster ushered in a turbulent period in the RWB's history that saw the final exodus of Lloyd and Farrally and the installation (in 1958) of Arnold Spohr as artistic director.  Spohr was a former company dancer, a tall, lean, elegant partner for the Winnipeg Ballet's leading ladies.  When American choreographer and director Benjamin Harkarvy shook the dust of Winnipeg from his heels just weeks before scheduled performances, the company board turned to Spohr for temporary help.  The result was the best shows the RWB had given in years and Spohr was persuaded to take up permanent residence.  He stayed for thirty years and still has his own office in the impressive new $10 million home the RWB built for itself in 1988. 

   Under Spohr the company began to attract international attention, but it was another decade before the RWB's triumphant gold-medal-winning visit to the 1968 Paris International Ballet Festival.  Before that Spohr and his board of directors had had to deal with the threat of extinction as the young Canada Council debated whether the country could really afford three ballet troupes.  Spohr, always a great believer in tradition and loyalty, had no desire to wrench the RWB from the populist image it had enjoyed under Lloyd and Farrally.  Although the RWB presented Canada's first indigenous full-length ballet (Rose Latulippe, with choreography by Brian Macdonald) in 1966, the company did not tackle another full-length work until John Neumeier's version of The Nutcracker ten years later.  For the most part Spohr stuck to the proven formula of a repertoire of shorter works that could be mixed and matched to create programs with broad appeal. 

   The mixing and matching, however, was artful in the extreme.  It was accomplished with one eye cannily focussed on audience taste and the other on the needs of the RWB's constantly improving ensemble of dancers.  In this respect Spohr served both sides of the footlights well.  With his natural curiosity and eye for talent he became accomplished at grabbing emerging choreographers - Macdonald, Vesak, Neumeier, Araiz - before they became too well known.  He was willing to shock his audiences with the uncompromising realism of Vesak's The Ecstasy of Rita Joe, jolt their political sensitivities with Kurt Jooss' classic anti-war ballet The Green Table or make an appeal to the youth of Canada with Neumeier's The Game (set to a rock version of Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition).  Spohr's vision of dance encompassed a range that also included the elegant dance-for-dance's-sake of Dutch choreographer Hans van Manen, the foot-stomping good humour of Agnes de Mille's Rodeo, the prettiness of Frederick Ashton's Les Patineurs and the poetic charm of Fokine's Les Sylphides. 

   The RWB embraced eclecticism long before other companies around the world acknowledged it as a valid - and marketable - approach.  Then, just when the RWB had been pigeonholed as the "something-for-everyone" company of mixed bills, Arnold Spohr set about giving Winnipegers the kind of multi-act spectacles that everyone had come to assume were the prerogative of the National Ballet.  First came Rudi van Dantzig's Romeo and Juliet, then Giselle and most recently Swan Lake.  The timing of these productions, as critics hastily pointed out, coincided with the rise to fame of the RWB's most brilliant and bankable dancer, 1980 gold medal-winner at the prestigious Varna ballet competition, Evelyn Hart.  Certainly it made sense to mount the kind of ballets that could do justice to Hart's talent and ambition. 

   In 1970 Spohr had encouraged former principal dancer David Moroni to develop a professional training program as an extension of the RWB's general and profitable community ballet school.   When Hart felt smothered by the hothouse pressures of Toronto's National Ballet School it was to Moroni that she had come for help.  Both Moroni and Spohr looked to Russia for inspiration and through the legendary teacher Vera Volkova, in her time the major exponent of the Vaganova training system, the RWB's professional school began to produce dancers with a distinctly more expansive and dynamic way of moving than those to be found in either Montreal or Toronto. 

   When Spohr decided to mount the big story ballets it was because the company was ready for the challenge, because it had to prove itself in works that are still regarded as the acid test of a ballet troupe's classical credentials.  It was an antidote to those perhaps unintentionally patronising descriptions of the RWB as "prairie fresh" and "youthfully exuberant".  It was proof that the RWB was not somehow caught in permanent adolescence. 

   It would be foolish to pretend that the RWB can pull off a Swan Lake or Giselle with the same depth and finesse as the much larger seventy-member National Ballet.  The RWB is still a company of individuals with a variety of physiques that often run counter to the demands of pure classicism.  Nevertheless, Spohr would never have produced these works if he had doubted for a moment that his company could dance them with integrity - an integrity founded in total dramatic conviction and a sensitivity to the nuances of style.  The RWB dances the classics its own way, but they are still the classics. 

   One of the dangers of artistic eclecticism as practiced by Spohr during his thirty-year directorship is that the company itself never assumes an identity, that it remains faceless.  Yet nobody who has seen the RWB perform would ever call it faceless.  Even if it lacks a consistent physical style it has a distinctive approach to the business of performing that is strongly linked to the troupe's populist roots.  Where the National Ballet at times looks more concerned to impress with its sheer magnificence, the RWB always evinces an insistent urge to communicate.  It is a company with personality, with a winning stage manner that sometimes flirts dangerously with cuteness, that overtly sets out to entertain and that (in David Moroni's words) "never looks down at its audience." 

   Oddly enough, it is questionable whether that enduring personality that survives the perennial flow of dancers, of staff changes and even changes of director, could have happened anywhere else but Winnipeg.  As Evelyn Hart describes it, "there is a special commitment about the people who come to work here.  They are here because they are committed to dance." 

   Now, as it is celebrating its 50th anniversary, the RWB is having to endure one of the most emotional upheavals in its history, the cumulative effect of three deaths.  One, that of co-founder Betty Farrally, is a symbolic loss; the other two, those of newly installed director Henny Jurriens and principal dancer David Peregrine, are of more practical consequence.  Jurriens, who died with his wife in a car crash (on the same day Farrally died of cancer), had already proved himself an exceptional leader.  The dancers still feel genuinely bereft.  The vision of the future shown them by Jurriens appears to have been snatched away and the company must begin its second half-century under a veil of uncertainty. 

   That future, however, became a little clearer on February 2, when the Royal Winnipeg Ballet announced it had found a new artistic director to take over immediately from interim head Andre Lewis.  After an intensive search, the RWB's board of directors named Australian-born John Meehan.  As Meehan himself admitted, the company is taking a calculated risk picking him since Meehan has no previous experience directing a ballet company.  However, he has much else to recommend him.  As a former star of the Australian Ballet and of American Ballet Theatre, Meehan won critical acclaim for the nobility and theatrical flair of his dancing.  Canadian audiences had a chance to sample this two years ago when Meehan starred with Karen Kain in a CBC-TV production of The Merry Widow.  Meehan, who turns 40 in May, says he has now retired from dancing but the wealth of experience gained in a career that spans Broadway, London's West End and even a stint on television's The Love Boat is certain to prove valuable as he takes over the Royal Winnipegers. 

   Those who know Meehan well describe him as friendly and open - qualities that should suit him admirably to the almost family atmosphere of Canada's oldest dance troupe.  Meehan's task is to build on the traditions established by Arnold Spohr and on the vision of the future offered by Henny Jurriens. 

   Michael Crabb is a producer for CBC Radio's The Arts Tonight.  </I

    SELLING CANADIAN CULTURE  
   Kevin Teichroeb personally shortens the distance from sea to shining sea  

   There's a man with a mission at Theatrebooks, Toronto's performing arts specialty bookstore.  Manager Kevin Teichroeb wants to put information about the arts into the hands of readers all over Canada.  Travelling across the country revealed to Teichroeb a surprisingly high demand for Canadian material.  "People are isolated because we make them isolated," he says. "This is an age of communications technology; there's no reason anyone should be unable to get the hooks they want." Teichroeb has a wide vision of Canadian culture; "I think the world perspective is the exciting thing," he says. 

   Theatrebooks, whose clients are mostly teachers and theatre professionals, will take orders from anywhere in Canada.  </I

<I

  The Niagara shoot 

   Jock Carroll got the assignment of a lifetime when he was sent to photograph Marilyn Monroe on the set of Niagara.  She wasn't at all what he'd expected ... 

   It was over forty years ago on Thursday, June 5, 1952.  Harry Truman was president, the Cold War had escalated into the Korean War, the United States had set off its first nuclear bomb, and the popular songs of the year were "Kisses Sweeter Than Wine" and Hoagy Carmichael's version of "In the Cool, Cool, Cool of the Evening". 

   I was about to have lunch with Marilyn Monroe.  A few days earlier, Marilyn had descended on Niagara Falls, Ontario, with a film crew of sixty, which included the actors Joseph Cotten, Jean Peters, and Casey Adams, and the famous director Henry Hathaway.  They had come to make the film Niagara.  

   At my elbow a chubby film publicity man named Frank Neill was on the phone to Marilyn, arranging a lunch for the Rainbow Room in the General Brock Hotel overlooking the Falls.  

   I heard him say, "All right, honey.  He's here to do a photo spread for Weekend Magazine.  That's the biggest publication in Canada.  Fine, honey.  We'll wait for you at the top of the elevator." 

   Hanging up, Neill turned to me.  "She says she'll come right up.  But that may mean one hour or two hours."  He shook his head.  "God knows what she'll be wearing.  Here's somebody who's potentially one of the richest women in Hollywood, and she's arrived here with practically no clothes.  No clothes, but lots of books.  Still, she handles herself well." 

   "Apart from that, I don't go out to nightclubs.  I don't go out much at all - even to premieres.  The studio made a fuss when I wouldn't go to the premiere of All About Eve.  They said it was a must.  But they got over it.  Sometimes, after putting in a good day's work, I can enjoy a glass of wine with friends.  But I can't force myself into that sort of thing.  And of course I read a lot."
 "What are you reading now?"
 "I'm reading The Thinking Body by Mabel Ellsworth Todd.  And I've just finished Letters to a Young Poet by Rainer Maria Rilke.  I read The Prophet.  And I love Whitman and Thomas Wolfe."  She looked at me.  "What do you think of Wolfe?"
  Flustered, I replied, "Well, I think he's a great subjective writer.  Maybe somewhat undisciplined.  I read that he turns in million-word manuscripts and that his editor, Maxwell Perkins, has to cut them in half in order to get them to book size"
  "You'd understand all that," said Marilyn, "if you read his book How to Write a Novel.  I've just finished it." 

   Perhaps thinking that I would get lost in literature, Neill addressed a question to Marilyn.  "Is it true what you said to Hathaway about the calendar?" Marilyn laughed.  "Yes, it's true.  But it wasn't Hathaway."  She explained to me.  "They keep asking if it's true I had nothing on when I posed for that calendar nude.  Yesterday I said, 'Oh, no.  I had the radio on'." 

   We all laughed.  I asked, "If it wasn't Hathaway, who was it?"  "It doesn't matter," said Marilyn.  "If you want to use it, give it to Hathaway."  She went on.  "Funny how shocked people in Hollywood were when they learned I'd posed in the nude.  At one time I'd always said no when photographers asked me.  But you'll do it when you get hungry enough.  It was at a time when I didn't seem to have much future.  I had no job and no money for the rent.  I was living in the Hollywood Studio Club for Girls.  I told them I'd get the rent somehow.  So I phoned up Tom Kelley, and he took these two colour shots - one sitting up, the other lying down.  I didn't think I'd done anything wrong.  His wife, Natalie, was there during the shooting.  I earned the fifty dollars that I needed.  But people were shocked when they recognized me." 

   The nude photo for which Marilyn was paid fifty dollars was sold by the photographer for $500.  The calendar manufacturer was reported to have made a million dollars when the calendar caught on.  

   Marilyn's lunch was interrupted by a procession of autograph hounds who pushed bits of paper and menus almost in her face.  Marilyn obliged with a smile, but she observed in an aside, "I look forward to the day when I'll be free of all this."  She added sombrely, "And perhaps free of depression." 

   As it was becoming almost impossible to talk, Neill called for the check and we left the Rainbow Room.  

   For the next several days I dogged Marilyn's footsteps around the set of Niagara with a couple of Leica cameras around my neck.  Picture opportunities were few but I came to be accepted as part of the scenery by the crew and, more importantly, by Marilyn. 

   One afternoon I accompanied her on a publicity tour put on for local officials.  She made presentations, posed for group photos, and did a dutiful tour of a local factory.  Marilyn brightened up my factory photos by loosening the straps of her blouse, leaning over a piece of machinery to give my camera a good view of her breasts, and flashing her best smile.  

   Another day Neill arrived at my room with news.  "Marilyn isn't shooting today," he said, "and she says she'll go out with you for colour shots after she's through with her hairdresser and make-up man." 

   On our way to Marilyn's room, Neill said, "She likes you.  Because you're taking time to get to know her."  Neill seemed to think this was cleverness on my part, whereas it was simply my lack of experience.  

   After the hairdresser and Neill departed for other duties, I was left with Marilyn and her make-up man, Whitey, who went to work on Marilyn's face.  Some time later the phone rang.  "It's New York calling," said Marilyn.  Whitey and I knew this meant Joe DiMaggio so we discreetly withdrew to the hotel corridor.  

   Whitey liked Marilyn and began talking about her.  "She takes life pretty seriously.  Have you noticed while she's sitting around on the set, she always has a script in her hands?  Well, she's not studying her lines.  No, she has one of those deep soul books hidden in the script.  Rilke, Franck, Freud, or maybe Emerson.  She finds something in a book she thinks is true and she writes herself a little note about it.  You know, 'You don't save souls in bunches,' or, 'All life is a road of discovery leading to yourself."  That sort of thing" 

   "She wants to be right, all the time.  They don't have much of a life, you know.  Reporters or photographers all the time.  If they go out in public, a crowd gathers.  I wouldn't want it." 

   Marilyn let us back into her room and began skipping about like a little girl.  "I'm going to New York for the weekend!" she cried.  "If Hathaway will let me!" 

   She put in a call to the director and, while waiting for him to call back, ran around the room picking up clothes and a little hat and holding them against her while she examined herself in the mirror.  

   She groaned.  "I haven't got a thing with me - just slacks and a skirt.  When they said Canada, I thought it would be up in the mountains somewhere.  Jean Peters lent me this suit - but it doesn't fit around the hips, does it?  Maybe Wardrobe will have something." 

   The phone rang. 

   She dumped the clothes on the bed and grabbed the phone, talking excitedly.  She made another call.  She talked more, her voice gradually rising.  

   When she put down the phone, she said, "They're passing the buck.  Hathaway says I can leave if the unit manager says I can.  The unit manager says it's all right with him, but Hathaway will have to take the responsibility.  Neither of them will.  And they promised before that I could go if I didn't have scenes coming up." 

   She sat down and Whitey began working on her face again.  "Whitey," she asked, "do you think I'm being unreasonable?"  Whitey shook his head.  

   "Don't say so," said Marilyn, "if you think I am.  I haven't had any time off for the past four pictures." 

   "I don't think you're unreasonable," Whitey replied.  "But, on the other hand, I didn't think they'd let you go, either.  If the weather's bad tomorrow, they'll have to shoot indoors and they'll need you." 

   Marilyn went to the phone again.  "I'll have to put in another call to Joe and tell him they won't let me come." 

   When the call came through Whitey and I trooped outside once more, but this time we could hear her voice through the door - 

   "But darling!  They won't let me come!  Don't you understand?  Don't you believe me, darling?"  Her voice was distraught.  "But Joe - " 

   The call ended abruptly as though Joe had slammed down the phone.  It was a long ten-minute wait before Marilyn opened her door again.  Her eyes were wet and her mascara had run.  

   She sat down in front of the mirror and looked at herself.  She managed a kind of smile.  "I'm sorry, Whitey, but I guess you'll have to do my eyes over again."  By the time Whitey had repaired her face the afternoon had almost gone, but Marilyn said we should take our planned drive.  It was a beautiful sunny afternoon and I drove around the Niagara peninsula looking for a haystack.  I had some naive idea that I needed one as a backdrop for a colour photo.  We couldn't find a haystack and in retrospect I realize I should have just stopped anywhere and photographed her against a rail fence, a barn, a field of grain.  She didn't need a backdrop.  

   After a while I looked over and saw that Marilyn had fallen asleep, curled up in the front seat beside me.  I didn't have the heart to pursue the project any more that day and drove her back to the hotel.  She walked barefoot up the front steps of the hotel, carrying her shoes in her hand.  I grabbed a shot of that.  

   When I had parked my car and returned, the hotel doorman called me over.  He was almost beside himself with delight.  "When you let her out of your car and she came in barefoot, - she stopped in front of my desk to put on her shoes.  When she bent over one of them fell right out! "  The doorman, at least, had had a good day.  

   Later that evening Neill caught up with me.  "Well," he asked, "have you or haven't you?  You have to admit I gave you every opportunity today."  I began to explain that it hadn't been that kind of day, but he thought I was evading the question and interrupted me.  

   "Okay," he said, "you're not going to talk.  Probably just as well.  A good friend of mine with Associated Press was banging Rita Hayworth regularly.  When Zanuck [head of 20th Century-Fox] found out, he had him barred from the lot.  Permanently.  How did you do for pictures?" 

   "Two grab shots," I said.  "One trying on Jean Peters's clothes.  The other of her walking barefoot up the steps of the hotel."  "Well, better luck next time," said Neill.  "We'll see when she's free again." 

   I was having some success in getting candid shots of Marilyn around the set over the next few days, but little success in setting up a session for a colour cover.  It depended on her shooting schedule and sufficient time for her hairdresser and make-up man to prepare her for colour close-ups.  

   And there was her tendency to be late for appointments.  
 

   "The secret of a base," she said, "is to take most of it off.  That's where most women go wrong."  She applied witch hazel, then patted herself with tissue.  "See?  I'm taking most of it off." 

    Death of a Liberator, 1838  
  By Lennard Sillanpaa 

   During the early morning of 12 November 1838, Nils Gustaf von Schoultz crossed into Upper Canada at the head of a 190-man American invasion force.  His objectives were liberty, the expulsion of British "tyranny" from North America, and the establishment of a domestic republican form of government for Canadians. 

   Their landing at a place called Windmill Point, located two kilometres east of the community of Prescott on the upper St. Lawrence River, was to be the launching of a "bloodless liberation" of Upper Canada sponsored by an American group called the Hunters' Society of Onondaga County, New York.  In the ensuing five days of fighting between Americans and Canadians, 37 men died and 89 were wounded.  This attempted American invasion was an episode in the rebellions of 1837-38. 

   Less than one month later on 8 December Nils von Schoultz was hanged and buried at Fort Henry in Kingston.  Like others before him and since, von Schoultz came to learn that Canadians are different from their American neighbours.  On the night before his execution, in a final letter to a friend, he wrote: 

  Let no further blood be shed; and believe me, from what I have seen, that all the stories that were told about the sufferings of the Canadian people were untrue.  

   Nils von Schoultz was a tragic figure whose brief appearance on the stage of Canadian history helped shape the development of this emerging nation.  In the days between his capture and execution, he also came to have a significant impact on the political development of a future Canadian prime minister. 

   Nils Gustaf von Schoultz was born on 7 October 1807 in Kuopio, Finland, the second son of a circuit court judge.  In 1808, during the Napoleonic wars, Russian troops crossed the Finnish frontier and his family fled to Sweden. 

   After the Treaty of Fredrikshamn in 1808 many officials and refugees returned to Finland, but von Schoultz's parents chose to remain in Sweden. 

   In 1821, the young Nils von Schoultz qualified for the Royal Military Academy in Stockholm where an older brother was already following a military career.  By December 1823, von Schoultz was promoted to second lieutenant in the Svea Regiment of Artillery.  In November 1830, he received an honourable discharge from the military. 

   In early 1831 stories from Poland reached Sweden that told of czarist repression and of fierce resistance by students and cadets in Warsaw.  Many Swedes decided to assist the Poles against their Russian masters.  One of these was von Schoultz who left for Poland in secrecy in 1831 and plunged headlong into the defence of Warsaw. 

   Von Schoultz later made his way to France where he joined the Foreign Legion in North Africa, moving on, in March of 1833, to join his family in Florence where his sister was studying music. 

   A year later he married Ann Cordelia Campbell in the English church at Florence.  His wife was a member of a well-established Scottish merchant family from Edinburgh.  The couple settled in Karlskrona, Sweden, where both their daughters were born. 

   Von Schoultz tried to settle down to a normal family life as a businessman-inventor but does not seem to have been successful.  In June 1836, he visited London on business.  His family remained in Sweden.  A month later, without telling anyone, he left for the United States. 

   While he officially gave his nationality as Swedish, von Schoultz began passing himself off as a Pole.  He was known to everyone as a former officer in the Polish Army who had been forced to leave his homeland by Russian oppressors. 

   Von Schoultz became interested in the salt industry developing around the upstate New York towns of Syracuse and Salina (Salina later merged to become part of Syracuse).  He came to have many friends in Salina, which was located near the Canadian border. 

   In December 1837 authorities in Upper Canada put down an attempted rebellion.  Many of the leaders of this uprising fled to the United States where they found sympathetic support for their proposals to liberate Canada from the oppression of British colonial rule. 

   Throughout 1838, a number of forces operating out of the United States conducted a series of raids and acts of piracy along the Canadian border.  Newspapers, local government officials and merchants in the border states led the campaign to "liberate" Canada.  Officials in Washington, under the administration of President Martin van Buren, however, were more cautious, so these liberation enthusiasts had to operate under the cloak of secrecy. 

   One organization that sprang to life in 1838 was the Patriot Hunters which formed hundreds of "Hunters' Lodges" throughout the border states, recruited some 40,000 members and raised tens of thousands of dollars for the purchase of arms. 

   The Hunters' Lodge of Salina recruited von Schoultz to their cause.  Von Schoultz, for his part, eagerly accepted the role of liberating Canada from what he believed to be the oppression of Britain. 

   One of the leading Hunters in New York state, John Ward Birge, devised a plan to capture the British garrison of Fort Wellington located in Prescott.  Directly opposite Prescott was Ogdensburg, New York, which was a hotbed of Hunter sympathizers.  Birge believed that the seizing of Fort Wellington, one of the main British garrisons along the Canadian-American border, would prompt dissatisfied Canadians to rise up in revolt. 

   Birge began recruiting a force of some 300 men, arms and ammunition, cannon, and vessels for this attack.  One of those he recruited was the recently arrived Nils von Schoultz. 

   Through the summer and fall of 1838, the Government of Upper Canada heard reports from informants living in the United States regarding the growth of popular American sentiment in favour of invading Canada and of the buildup of men, money and weapons in American communities along the border.  The government began to re-build Fort Wellington, and to establish a number of militia units in communities near the American border. 

   During the night of Sunday, 11 November an American steamer towing two schooners entered Canadian waters.  The private invasion force assembled by Birge - who had given himself the grandiose military title of "Major-General" - was aboard these vessels. 

   Near Prescott, the lines to the two schooners were cut.  An attempt at a surprise docking at the wharf in Prescott was sighted by residents who raised the alarm.  The two schooners retreated into the waters of the river and then separated. 

   At this point, the invasion of Canada by the Hunters became a combination of organizational chaos and low farce.  The larger of the two schooners grounded on a sandbar in American waters.  The smaller one, which had von Schoultz on board, landed on the Canadian side of the river at Windmill Point and began unloading its men and equipment. 

   Low farce occurred when "Major-General" Birge suddenly developed what he claimed was a stomach disorder and abruptly retired from the scene.  Others also decided to remain in Ogdensburg.  More than one hundred insurgents never made it to the Canadian side. 

   Later that Monday, officials of the United States Navy arrived in Ogdensburg and prevented any more attempts by American vessels to cross.  By Tuesday, there was little communication between Ogdensburg and Windmill Point. 

   When the insurgents at Windmill Point realized that Birge would not be joining them, von Schoultz was chosen as commander. 

   The American insurgents might have been more successful despite their appalling lack of preparation.  While the landing at Windmill Point was totally unplanned, the insurgents were fortunate to find a massive stone windmill some 20 metres high surrounded by several stone buildings.  From the top of the mill one could easily reconnoitre the surrounding area for enemy troop movements.  For an experienced military commander such as Nils von Schoultz, Windmill Point could have served as a perfect site for establishing a beachhead on enemy territory until reinforcements arrived. 

   The British and Canadians quickly collected a large force of regular soldiers and militia numbering nearly 2,000 men.  On Tuesday morning of that week the two sides engaged in a fierce rifle and musket battle.  Finding the insurgents too strongly entrenched, the Canadians retreated to await the arrival of their heavy artillery. 

   As the week progressed, the situation for the insurgents became increasingly hopeless.  The Canadians had not risen in rebellion against their colonial government.  In fact, the very opposite was happening as hundreds joined their local militias to repulse this invasion.  Some of the Americans either escaped to the United States or were captured while trying to leave.  Many suffered from wounds incurred in the Tuesday battle.  The weather turned very cold. 

   Although the insurgents held their position for five days, no reinforcements came.  What was particularly frustrating for the hard-pressed American invading party throughout the week was to look across the river and see thousands of Americans, most of whom were sympathetic to the cause of "liberating" Canada from British rule, standing along the shorelines watching events unfold on the Canadian side. 

   On Friday afternoon, the British artillery began bombarding the American positions.  The insurgents began to either surrender or attempt to escape.  Von Schoultz himself was captured late Friday evening as he hid in bushes along the river bank. 

   Many of the battles fought in 1838 between American raiding parties and the British/Canadian forces were little more than bloody skirmishes lasting less than an hour.  The American invaders lacked the discipline of the British regular soldiers or the determination of Canadian militia members defending their own homes. 

   It is to von Schoultz's great credit as a military commander that the rag-tag fighting unit he led (some of whom were only 14 years old and none of whom had any real military experience) held out for five days in a desperate situation after sustaining heavy initial losses. 

   The prisoners spent one night in Fort Wellington.  They were then transferred by steamer to Kingston and the military prison at Fort Henry where the government held its courts-martial. 

   A young Kingston lawyer, John A. Macdonald, had been retained to give legal advice to one of the other prisoners.  Macdonald met von Schoultz at this time and gave him some legal advice for conducting his defence at his court-martial.  Von Schoultz insisted on pleading guilty. 

   At his court-martial, von Schoultz made a distinct impression on the British regular soldiers and others of his Canadian captors.  As leader of the insurgents, von Schoultz assumed all responsibility for the tragedy at Windmill Point.  He made no attempt to defend himself except to say he had treated his wounded prisoners well.  He never displayed any bitterness and refrained from censuring those who had let him down with promises of reinforcements. 

   A total of eleven of the prisoners were executed.  Sixty others were sent into exile to the penal colony of Van Dieman's Land (present-day Tasmania). 

   The first of the insurgents to hang was Nils von Schoultz.  As a mark of respect for his military background, von Schoultz was the only one of the eleven to be hanged and buried at Fort Henry. 

   Throughout the time of his capture until his execution, von Schoultz maintained his posture of being a former Polish officer.  It was perhaps essential that he continued to do so.  The fact that von Schoultz had a Scottish wife and that he had abandoned her and their children would hardly have improved his situation.  It would probably have dissipated the respect he had been able to create among his captors as an honourable, albeit misguided, lover of liberty. 

   For more than 130 years, Canadian and American historians regarded von Schoultz as the former Polish army officer he had portrayed himself to be.
 
  It was not until 1971, when Ella Pipping, von Schoultz's great-granddaughter, published a biography on her ancestor that historians learned that von Schoultz was actually a Finn by birth, a Swedish national and that, in fact, this "Polish" freedom-fighter had only spent some six months in Poland. 

   Macdonald drew up von Schoultz's will.  Money was left to the Roman Catholic college in Kingston and to families of the Canadian militiamen killed at the Windmill.  He wrote a last letter to friends in Salina.  There was, however, no last letter to his family in Sweden.  </I
  BRAVE NEW BALLET: ideas and athleticism shape an exciting work 

   New York City-born choreographer William Forsythe says that nothing would surprise him more in life than "no surprises."  And when the National Ballet of Canada presented the world premiere of his 25-minute work "the second detail" in Toronto last week, the surprises exploded in rapid succession.  The uniformly grey set, designed by Forsythe, was reminiscent of a rehearsal hall - but at one point, snow began falling inside it.  High above the grey-clad dancers' heads, a filmy white dress remained suspended in the air, attainable as a cloud, throughout the piece.  Meanwhile, the choreography, both cerebral and daringly athletic, provided surprises of its own.  Now 42 and the artistic director of Germany's Frankfurt Ballet, Forsythe has been hailed by critics as one of the most original interpreters of classical dance since George Balanchine, the Russian-born master of the mid-20th century. 

   Forsythe's decision to create a work for the National was a major honor for the Toronto-based company - and a welcome respite from the recessionary gloom that has been gathering around the troupe in recent months.  Earlier this year, artistic director Reid Anderson announced that as a cost-cutting measure, he would not renew the contracts of five company members, among them two principal dancers.  The company also cancelled plans to produce three ballets for a 1991 Mozart festival in Toronto.  National Ballet officials predict that, even with those cuts, the company's accumulated deficit will mount to $2 million by the end of the 1991-1992 season, up from the current $1.6 million. 

   Still, at last week's opening, the performers looked strong and adventurous.  Forsythe's distinctive vocabulary of angular, ferociously swift movements is already familiar to the company's dancers - his 1985 work, Steptext, entered the National's repertoire in 1989.  Like Steptext, the second detail applies a one word, risk-taking freedom to the diamond-hard precision of classical dance.  Forsythe, who used to dance the classics in New York's Joffrey Ballet, told Maclean's: "A lot of my stuff doesn't look like ballet, but only ballet dancers could do it." 

   In person, the lanky, freckled choreographer is a mixture of bubbly humor and intellectual adventurousness.  His enthusiasms range from dancing in the rap music videos ("M.C. Hammer is the greatest") to French deconstructionist Michel Foucault's Archeology of Knowledge ("a really groovy book").  The eclectic nature of his creativity is readily apparent in "the second detail".  For several minutes, a film of icebergs, underwear and other random images is projected onto a blank wall, competing with the dancers for attention.  The effect is distracting - but ultimately stimulating.  For everyone involved, a Forsythe ballet is an exhilarating workout.  </I

   EXISTENTIAL ACROBATICS: Robert Desrosiers choreographs a life 

   The best-known works of Toronto-based choreographer Robert Desrosiers have unfolded in a strange and spectacular dream world - a place where athletic dancers in elaborate, unearthly costumes cavort among the special effects.  In Blue Snake, the choreographer's 1985 commission for the National Ballet of Canada, a 30-foot-high giant's head gobbles up zebra-suited dancers.  Incognito, which the artist created for the 1988 Calgary Winter Olympics arts festival and revised in 1989, combines surreal imagery with high-tech trickery.  By comparison, his latest work for his own company is a surprisingly straightforward piece.  The hour Jeux (Games), which debuted last week at Toronto's Premiere Dance Theatre, is about the phases of human life from conception to the grave.  It is a production in which dance rather than spectacle is dominant.  Unfortunately, the absence of spectacle is all too conspicuous: on its own, Desrosiers's choreography proves to be only intermittently interesting. 

   Described by its 37-year-old choreographer as "a portrayal of the cyclical nature of our lives," Jeux begins with two lovers conceiving a child on a billowing sheet.  In an inventive scene change, the sheet becomes the wall of a womb, revealing Desrosiers as the fetus within.  He bursts through the sheet, simulating birth.  In the rest of the first act, members of the Premiere Dance Theatre and guest artists from the Canadian Children's Dance Theatre portray successive stages of life.  For most of Jeux's second act, titled "Life Carnival," the narrative disappears and the relationships among the dancers become abstract.  At the end, an old man totters onto the stage and dies, completing the life cycle. 

   Desrosiers's choreography is dynamic, and his dancers are, for the most part, equal to the punishingly acrobatic demands that he places on them.  But he relies heavily on a fairly limited range of swirling, churning movements that eventually seem repetitive.  Jeux's other major weakness is that the first and second acts bear little relation to each other; the finale with the old man seems on and fails to draw the two halves together.  Like the wizard of Oz, Robert Desrosiers looks disconcertingly human when he emerges from his arsenal of special effects.  </I

   Eloquent ambiguity 

   When Joanne Tod was a student at the Ontario College of Art in the early 1970s, painting was a decidedly unfashionable activity.  Making art with a video camera, or by arranging rocks on a gallery floor - that was fashionable.  And for those who felt compelled to paint, there was always abstract art.  But in her large canvases, which often addressed thorny social issues, Tod persisted in depicting subjects realistically.  Since the 1970s, such figurative painting has made a comeback - and Tod, now 38, is one of its most celebrated Canadian practitioners.  A major exhibition of her work opened recently at Toronto's Power Plant gallery, where it will be on view until Aug. 25.  It then travels to Saskatoon's Mendel Art Gallery (Sept. 20 to Nov. 3), the co-organizer of the show with the Power Plant, and to the Winnipeg Art Gallery (Nov. 29 to Feb. 16).  The artist says that she does not regret having been out of step in art school.  "It was a good experience because it put me in a position to be contrary," said Tod.  "I find it really interesting to put myself in opposition to other things." 

   What is clear from the show, which features 20 large paintings from the past decade, is that Tod's work simmers with opposition to sexism, racism and absolutist thinking.  Those topics have led many other artists into the mire of diatribe.  But Tod has confronted such issues with engaging originality and, on occasion, mordant humor.  Institutions including the National Gallery of Canada and the Vancouver Art Gallery have acquired her work.  And now she is starting to gain recognition abroad: in the fall, some of her paintings, which currently sell for between $15,000 and $35,000 each, will be part of a group show at the Thaddaeus Ropac Gallery in Paris.  Said Mendel curator Bruce Grenville, who put together the current show: "Anyone can be a flash in the pan, but Joanne has been producing very strong, articulate work for 10 years." 

   A vibrant, affable woman who rode her bicycle to a recent interview with Maclean's, Tod recalled that she began drawing and painting during her childhood.  Raised in Mississauga, Ont., she was the only child of computer technician Andrew Tod and his homemaker wife, Georgina Tod.  After graduating from the Ontario College of Art in 1974, Tod worked as an assistant in a private gallery for a number of years.  But since 1982, she has been able to devote herself to painting full time.  The artist now lives in downtown Toronto with Bob Becker, a musician with the award-winning percussion group Nexus. 

   While Tod's work has become more complex and less direct over the past decade, one constant has been her use of photographs as the basis for her paintings.  Self Portrait, a 1982 canvas that is perhaps her best-known work, is derived from a 1940s advertisement showing an elegant, formally gowned woman posing on a flight of steps beneath a night sky.  Calling the glamorous figure a self-portrait appears to be a simple act of fantasizing - except for one thing.  In yellow letters printed over the figure's dress are the words "beneath my arm is the color of Russell's Subaru."  That prosaic stray thought - it refers to the shade of a friend's car - stomps across the dreamy vision, challenging its outdated conception of ideal womanhood without entirely cancelling out the image's nostalgically romantic allure. 

   In 1983, Tod turned that painting into a picture within a picture with Self Portrait as Prostitute.  In the latter work, the earlier painting hangs on the wall of a tasteful dining room.  Clearly, the original work has become a commodity, something to be consumed along with dinner.  Tod now says that at that point in her career, she worried whether the need to sell paintings would cause her to compromise her work.  But since then, she adds, she has learned from feminism that "it's in my best interest to have the financial autonomy that selling paintings makes possible.  I haven't had to take jobs that would take away from my painting time.  As a result, I think my product has improved." 

   By the mid-1980s, Tod was dealing with race-related questions in her work.  The 1984 canvas A Diamond Is Forever shows a well-dressed elderly couple evidently posing for the camera in their own upper-class home - the woman's hand rests on a table in a proprietary fashion.  The picture would be a typical society portrait, except that the couple is black.  And that unexpected element forces viewers to confront their preconceptions about who belongs where in society. 

   For several years, Tod has been combining disparate, often perplexing images in her work, which on the whole has become more.  Tod says that Purple Heart, a massive (10 feet by 15 feet) 1989 composition, was inspired by the massacre in Beijing's Tiananmen Square two years ago.  In the painting, a pair of intricately carved Chinese panels frame a close-up of two traditionally decorated Chinese vases.  Incongruously, a vertical row of chevrons painted in a flat, abstract style bridges a gap between the two vases.  And diagonal smears of magenta paint deface the side panels. 

   Like much of Tod's work, the painting is a highly personal response to a larger event.  Said Tod, with reference to the smears: "Something that struck me was a news report about students throwing cans of paint at the official portraits of Mao."  She added that among her own early works had been a series of idealized Mao portraits.  The smears also recall the work of American abstract painter Morris Louis, while the chevrons allude to a shape repeatedly used by another, Kenneth Noland.  "In referring to those painters, I was referring back to my own education, and to when I made those Mao paintings with all this hope and idealism," said the artist.  She noted that the combination of the chevrons and the smears in Purple Heart also suggested a spinal column and a rib cage: "It anthropomorphizes the image and puts it back to the real thing that happened there - mass killing." 

   While it was Tod's contempt for a repressive political regime that inspired Purple Heart, she opposes absolutism in all of its lesser guises as well.  In particular, she balks at the kind of art that screams out its message without allowing any room for dissent or ambiguity.  "I have gone through a really vehement political phase," she said, "but I never felt I was trying to be didactic in the sense of saying 'This is how I feel and this is what is right and this is what you should feel, too.' "  Combining passionate commitment and a questioning intelligence, Joanne Tod has a knack for probing unsettling issues.  </I

   A DECADE THAT ROARED: a Montreal show explores the manic 1920s 

   Perhaps more than any decade this century, the 1920s were years of social flux and artistic frenzy.  The desolation of the First World War gave way to the machine age - and an acceleration in all aspects of life.  It was the era of sprouting skyscrapers and Charles Lindberg's historic transatlantic flight.  In the smoke-filled cabarets of Berlin, the crowded cafes of Paris and the steamy nightclubs of New York City, there was a frantic burst of creative energy.  A number of artists provided glimpses of the technological future: German film-maker Fritz Lang's Metropolis (1926) and French painter Fernand Leger's industrial paintings visualized the "robot," a word coined in 1921.  </I
  A SPECIAL SPIRIT: Jack Shadbolt combines intellect and passion 

   The people in the lineup moved slowly towards the elderly man seated at a table at Calgary's Glenbow Museum.  Surrounded by 100 works collected for the first retrospective of his career since 1969, Vancouver artist Jack Shadbolt, 82, cheerfully signed exhibition posters and catalogues.  An art student told Shadbolt that she liked his 1977 collage of 46 brightly colored butterflies entitled Homage to Vladimir II, a tribute to author-lepidopterist Vladimir Nabokov.  "They are an odd lot," he told her as he scrawled his name across the poster, a detail of his 1978 landscape Wild Grass Suite.  "I used bits of pictures from a bundle of fashion magazines.  I knew fabrics because my mother was a dressmaker and used me as a clotheshorse."  After more than six decades as an artist and influential teacher, the dressmaker's son is now a revered senior statesman of domestic art.  Said the retrospective's curator, Patricia Ainslie, the Glenbow's curator of art: "He is central to western Canadian art and was of major significance nationally in the 1950s and 1960s to Canadian art." 

   The Calgary show, called Correspondences: Jack Shadbolt, makes clear that its subject is an artist of both intellect and passion, a restless creator who has mastered a wide variety of styles.  The retrospective will remain on view in Calgary until Jan. 5 before it travels next summer to Vancouver, and then on to the Art Gallery of Windsor in Ontario and the National Gallery in Ottawa.  The show traces Shadbolt's introduction to, and assimilation of, styles including social realism, surrealism and abstractionism.  Along the way, he found inspiration in such artists as Emily Carr, Edvard Munch, Paul Cezanne, Pablo Picasso and Diego Rivera.  Yet the retrospective also demonstrates that early on, Shadbolt forged his own esthetic - a vibrant, sensual and urgent approach to his subject matter, which has often included native mythology, and nature and its destruction.  Said the artist in an interview with Maclean's: "You don't just copy other artists - you move alongside to see if what they do can contribute to your own resources." 

   Shadbolt's rise to prominence - and financial success - was slow.  "I sold no pictures for many years," he said in an address to mark the Glenbow retrospective opening on Nov. 2.  "Then, in the 1960s, I got a Canada Council grant.  Then another.  One award leads to another.  I got the Order of Canada.  Gradually, I became known as one of those western intellectuals who counted."  Now, a commercial Shadbolt exhibition stirs collectors to a frenzy.  Last February at Vancouver's Bau-Xi Gallery, buyers began lining up more than 24 hours in advance for a show of recent works by the artist.  Within 15 minutes, 23 of the 28 paintings were sold.  A small Shadbolt work sells for about $6,000, while his larger paintings command between $30,000 and $50,000. 

   Shadbolt recalls that as a boy, he planned a career in commercial art.  Born in Essex, England, in 1909, Jack Leonard Shadbolt was the second of five children born to sign painter and paperhanger Edmund Shadbolt and his wife, Alice.  Jack was 3 when his parents moved to British Columbia, where they eventually settled in Victoria.  In his late teens, he committed himself to fine art and to teaching. 

   Over the years, Shadbolt taught art in a number of high schools, moving in 1938 to the Vancouver School of Art, where he worked off and on for 28 years, becoming a valued and influential instructor.  He also travelled, working and studying in Toronto, New York City and Europe.  During the Second World War, Shadbolt served in London as an administrative officer for the Official Canadian Army War Artists Programme.  One of his duties was to file and catalogue photographs that advancing Allied soldiers had taken of the Buchenwald and Belsen concentration camps.  The war was a sobering lesson in human brutality, inspiring such bleak works as Dog Among the Ruins (1947) and Bird Image (1948).  But Shadbolt says that it also helped him to understand abstract art.  "A bomb hits a building, blows it up and then, in memory, the pieces fall back together for an image of what it used to be," he said.  "It is dismemberment and reassembly." 

   In 1945, Shadbolt returned to Vancouver to work and teach.  That year, he married Ottawa resident Doris Meisel, who went on to become an influential critic and art curator (they have no children).  Back in Canada, Shadbolt refined his artistic vision, cultivating the West Coast influences that recur throughout his work.  Many of his drawings and paintings echo the work of Carr, who had the young Shadbolt to afternoon teas in the 1930s.  The Winter Barns (1936) is a moody, Carr-like evocation of a rustic scene.  And Shadbolt pays explicit tribute to his mentor in the 1968 charcoal work Hornby Suite (Homage to Emily Carr), a brooding landscape. 

   Shadbolt's mature work shows him to be a quintessentially West Coast painter, immersed in the land and native mythologies of British Columbia.  Said Xisa Huang, owner of the Bau-Xi galleries in Vancouver and Toronto, which have represented Shadbolt for two decades: "He made his choice long ago to live and interpret things from a western Canadian perspective.  He is in touch with the special spirit of the West Coast."  But the artist also suffuses his works with a more universal, psychological resonance, as in Night Fears (Fetish Series #12), a 1970 painting incorporating Inuit imagery, and in the surrealistic Darkening Foreshore (1989). 

   Huang adds that Shadbolt's failure to penetrate the international market is not a major concern for the artist.  "He could have, but that isn't what interests him," said the Bau-Xi owner. "Instead, he is extremely interested in art and his own community."  Indeed, in 1988, Shadbolt and his wife set up the Vancouver Institute for the Visual Arts, a foundation that offers financial support to young artists. 

   Huang says that Shadbolt is as prolific as ever.  The artist's current studio works will be exhibited next February in Vancouver and Toronto and, noted Huang, "they will be abstract and full of energy.  He is still pushing." 

   Throughout his career, Shadbolt has grappled with, in his words, "reconciling nature with abstraction, and deliberation with intuition."  His art derives much of its power from that duality - its appeal to both heart and mind.  And Shadbolt continues to address those issues with an intense commitment.  "In growing older," says the artist in the retrospective catalogue, "it is simply that the problem becomes less how to paint than what to paint; to become concerned with a statement of authentic response to the complexity of life."  In his art, Jack Shadbolt makes that complexity both pleasurable and provocative.  </I

   STRIKING ORIGINALS: celebrating a Group of Seven contemporary 

   Ontario-born artist David Milne had strikingly simple desires.  He once wrote that having "hills to sit on while painting other hills" ranked high on his wish list.  Primarily a landscape painter, Milne, who died in 1953 at age 71, led a life that was hill-rich but cash-poor.  In 1934, while living in a tar-paper shack near Georgian Bay, he attempted to sell his entire body of work, approximately 1,000 pictures, to Vincent Massey and his wife, Alice.  Asking price: $5 apiece.  The future governor general and his wife did in fact buy 300 of them at that humble rate.  More recently, however, one of Milne's paintings sold for $85,800.  And last week, the largest retrospective ever of Milne's eloquent and original work opened at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection in Kleinburg, Ont., 30 km northwest of Toronto. 

   The 155-piece show, which travels in January to the Vancouver Art Gallery, co-organizer of the exhibition, and then in July to the National Gallery in Ottawa, seems likely to consolidate the reputation of a long-undervalued artist.  Funded by Trimark Investment Management Inc., Amex Bank of Canada and The Financial Post, the $1-million show includes watercolors, oil paintings and prints from major public galleries and private collections.  Said the retrospective's curator, Ian Thom: "He remains for me an endlessly fascinating artist."  Added Thom, formerly on the McMichael staff and now a senior curator at the Vancouver Art Gallery: "In his pictures, he was constantly challenging himself and doing the unexpected." 

   But Milne has always remained in the shadow of his famous contemporaries, Tom Thomson and the Group of Seven.  His own approach to landscape was very different from theirs - or anyone else's, for that matter.  While their bold canvases tend to celebrate nature in its full resplendence, Milne's art has a wintry, introspective quality, an intensity rooted in restraint.  Partly because of the smallness of his pictures - many of them are no bigger than a place mat - they have brought relatively modest sums at auction.  The record price for a Milne was set in Toronto in 1987, when the oil painting Temagami from Above the Railroad sold for $78,000, plus the auction house's premium of $7,800.  (Emily Carr's works of similar size have sold for comparable sums; some Group of Seven oil paintings have sold for more than $500,000.)  Milne's art never shouts to be heard - but, as Thom told Maclean's, "if you really take the time to look at it, you will be rewarded." 

   Early in life, Milne learned to work hard and live frugally.  Raised in Paisley, Ont., 180 km northwest of Toronto, he was the youngest of 10 children.  His parents, both Scottish immigrants, barely managed to support the family by running a home laundry and selling produce from their garden.  As a young man, Milne taught school for three years in Paisley and saved his money.  In 1903, after borrowing additional funds from one of his brothers, he moved to New York City to attend art school.  After three years of study at the Art Students League, he remained in the city, eking out an existence as a commercial artist. 

   All the time that he was painting signs and illustrating magazines, he continued to work at his own painting.  By frequenting the most progressive galleries, Milne came into contact with the work of such influential French artists as Georges Seurat and Henri Matisse.  Soon, his own work, which relied on the bright colors and animated brushwork that Postimpressionism had popularized, was gaining critical acclaim.  Five of his pictures were included in the 1913 International Exhibition of Modern Art, a shock-of-the-new collection that enraged art-world conservatives and went down in history as the Armory Show, a reference to the building in which it was held. 

   But at the same time that he was gaining recognition, the diffident and contemplative artist was restless in the city.  He wanted to move somewhere less expensive in order to abandon the time-consuming commercial work and focus wholly on his art.  In 1916, Milne and his wife - he had married a New Yorker, bookkeeper May (Patsy) Hegarty, in 1912 - moved to Boston Corners, a village in the hills of Upstate New York.  By the time he left the city, he had begun to develop his distinctive preference for subdued colors, applied so sparingly that areas of unpainted background showed through.  It was in Boston Corners, however, that he truly came into his own as an artist. 

   A pencil-and-watercolor work from his first year here, Bishop's Pond, provides stunning evidence of Milne's gift for capturing contrasting textures.  While the trees on the shore are scratchily depicted, the artist gave their reflections a fluid look by brushing a watercolor wash over the pond - a beautifully simple idea, and one that is entirely consistent with Milne's philosophical approach to his art.  He once described his pictures as "simplifications of line and color intended to produce a thrill, a kick."  An artist, he also wrote, "doesn't try to reproduce the thing before him: he simplifies and eliminates until he knows exactly what stirred him." 

   Milne's Boston Corners years were interrupted by service as an official Canadian war artist in 1918 and 1919.  The current retrospective contains an artistically and historically fascinating sampling of the paintings he executed in England near the end of the First World War, and in France soon after the fighting had ceased.  Better at portraying stark stillness than human figures in motion, Milne's most effective work depicted the war's desolate aftermath in such places as Vimy Ridge.  "I never could quite decide if I was the last soldier of the first tourist," he wrote with characteristic wryness, "but it was thrilling."  </I
  INFLAMMATORY SHOWS: Derek Goldby delights in provoking audiences 

   The current economic downturn does not seem to be hurting Derek Goldby.  While many of his fellow freelance theatre directors wait by the telephone, Goldby just keeps on working.  He recently took his eccentric and highly popular version of Moliere's Tartuffe from Theatre Calgary to the Canadian Stage Company in Toronto, where it runs until Oct. 26.  Meanwhile, he has staged an off-Broadway production of Edmonton playwright Brad Fraser's Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love.  The 50ish Goldby is also preparing Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard for Toronto's Tarragon Theatre, where it will run from Nov. 5 to Dec. 15.  In the midst of all that activity, he and Canadian Stage artistic director Bob Baker are discussing the possibility of opening a school for Canadian actors. 

   Goldby is busy for the simple reason that he is considered to be one of the country's best directors.  Born in Australia and raised in Britain - he immigrated to Canada in 1976 - he is also reputed to be arrogant and hard to please.  Goldby, who works frequently in the United States and Britain, is openly critical of Canada's theatre culture.  "You cannot really become a star in Canada, you cannot reach a point where you are held in real esteem," he said in an interview.  As a result, he added, the country tends to produce "middle-of-the-road, safe actors, instead of actors who take risks.  If you go to Stratford, you'll see some jolly good respectable acting.  But you won't see anybody burning up the scenery." 

   Goldby's best productions - including last year's vibrant The Importance of Being Earnest by Oscar Wilde (for the Canadian Stage) and his gripping version of August Strindberg's psychodrama The Father (for the Tarragon) - have often set the scenery smoking.  He has a talent for giving a new, often disturbing edge to classic plays.  He has transformed that pompous religious hypocrite Tartuffe, played by Brent Carver, from a 17th-century French Catholic into a contemporary evangelist in the Jim Bakker mould.  He speaks with a southern drawl, and in the famous seduction scene - in which the supposedly pious Tartuffe makes torrid advances on a married woman - he wears outrageous black leather pants with no bottom in them.  The approach works - at times brilliantly.  When Tartuffe's hypocrisy is finally exposed, Carver screams out his hatred while grovelling on a floor that Goldby has covered with peat moss.  Rarely has the sheer animality underlying Tartuffe's pretences been so powerfully exposed. 

   Meanwhile, the critical response in New York City to Goldby's Human Remains, now in an indefinite run at the 350-seat Orpheum Theatre, has been mixed.  But so far, audiences are flocking to see it.  As Goldby points out, "The play is going to be much more tested in New York than it was in Toronto [where director Jim Millan's production ran for a total of four months in two separate theatres].  In Toronto, a six-week run is a big success.  But in New York, it has to go for six months or a year - in a much bigger theatre - before you can call it a hit." 

   Goldby travels frequently to Britain, New York and his small holiday house in Morocco.  But he keeps returning to Canada, and particularly to Toronto.  He describes the city as "restful" - a state which his inflammatory productions seem determined to change.  </I

   PRIDE AND REMORSE: an old woman grieves her way to self-forgiveness 

  THE STONE ANGEL 

  Adapted by James W. Nichol
  Directed by Brian Richmond

   Hagar Shipley, the most prominent old woman in English-Canadian fiction, has taken to the stage.  Played by Barbara Chilcott, the embattled heroine of Margaret Laurence's novel The Stone Angel appears in a new theatrical version that opened this summer at Ontario's Blyth Festival and is now running until Oct. 6 at Toronto's Theatre Passe Muraille.  Finding a dramatic equivalent for the interior monologues and shifting perspectives of fiction is always difficult.  But in adapting The Stone Angel, playwright James W. Nichol has given Hagar a credible second life.  If she fails to fully satisfy, the fault is less with Passe Muraille's production than with the novel itself. 

   The play closely follows the book, which was written in 1964, 23 years before Laurence died.  It begins and ends with Hagar dying - while she reminisces about her failed life.  Hagar's problem is that she has too much pride.  It has ruined her marriage to Prairie farmer Bram Shipley (Thomas Hauff) and destroyed the life of her favorite son, John (Elliot Smith), whom she schemed to separate from his lover, Arlene (Allegra Fulton).  Fortunately, she grieves over her errors before she dies and so achieves a measure of self-forgiveness. 

   Director Brian Richmond seamlessly manages Hagar's movement in and out of her past.  Chilcott's transitions to girlhood are particularly affecting.  When Hagar's father (Alan Williams) punishes her by striking her with a ruler, Hagar's entire life is summed up by her brave but somehow inhuman refusal to cry. 

   Yet the play cannot escape the gothic sentimentality of the novel.  Most of Laurence's characters are caricatures, and not very original ones.  Hagar herself is a stereotype of the ranting, indomitable granny, familiar from countless pioneer epics - an impression underlined by Chilcott's brassy-voiced delivery, which glosses over the true fragility and terror of old age.  Despite much excellent acting from the supporting cast, The Stone Angel seems naive and old-fashioned.  Although there is human truth at the core of the production, it lacks the biting originality of the best theatre.  </I

   TRIUMPH IN EDMONTON: Lloyd Webber's latest work reaches Canada 

   Its producers say that it is the most popular show ever mounted on an Edmonton stage.  Nearly every day, they receive about 1,000 orders for tickets to Andrew Lloyd Webber's Aspects of Love, which started a seven-week run at the Citadel Theatre on Sept. 4.  By last week, the box office had already reached break-even point on the $3.2-million production, after selling about three-quarters of the 40,000 seats available.  To have secured the rights to Aspects in the first place was a major triumph for the Citadel and its director general, Robin Phillips.  And Lloyd Webber, who attended the opening-night performance at the Citadel's 685-seat Shoctor Theatre, applauded the Edmonton version, which moves to Toronto for a limited run beginning on Dec. 3.  Attending a gala reception following the performance, the composer told Maclean's: "It is so thrilling to have a new production."  Added the diminutive multimillionaire Englishman, creator of such musical extravaganzas as Cats and Phantom of the Opera: "It worked so well." 

   For the 43-year-old Lloyd Webber, one of the century's dominant theatrical composers with at least 13 productions of his musicals currently playing around the world, it was a chance to breathe new life into one of his less successful works.  Certainly, Phillips, 49, who became the Citadel's director general last year after a high-profile career that included six years as artistic director of southern Ontario's Stratford Festival, has managed to reinvigorate Aspects by giving it a tighter story line.  The musical first opened in London in 1989, where it is still running, but the New York City production closed in 1991 after a 10-month run.  It lacks the stage hydraulics and blockbuster antics of Lloyd Webber's other hits.  But Phillips's talented international cast (none of the leads is Canadian), which includes veteran Australian-born Shakespearean actor Keith Mitchell, endows the production with passion. 

   Based on a 1955 novella by David Garnett, who was on the periphery of Britain's famed Bloomsbury Group, the musical touches on the entanglements among five people over three generations.  As it opens, the focus is on 17-year-old London theatre fan Alex (American Ron Bohmer), who takes Rose (American Linda Balgord), an impoverished, older Parisian actress, to the retreat of his wealthy uncle George (Mitchell) in the south of France.  George is away from the idyllic seaside villa, and the lovers help themselves to his bed and his brandy.  "I feel 17 again," sings Rose.  "So do I," rejoins Alex, moments before George returns - to fall in love with, and ultimately marry, Rose.  Over the years, the sybaritic George, whose solution to life's problems is a glass of champagne, has other romantic interests - including Italian sculptress Giulietta (American Kelli James).  Meanwhile, Rose becomes a leading actress and plumbs other aspects of love in a brief liaison with Giulietta and nostalgic flings with Alex.  Eventually, George falls on hard times financially and immerses himself in paternal love for his daughter, Jenny, played by Toronto actresses Miranda de Pencier as the younger child and Lori Alter as the teenager.  And, in a further convolution, when Jenny grows up she becomes enamored of her cousin Alex. 

   Phillips's control of the rebuilt musical is evident: the story is more lucid than it was in the New York version.  And the director's use of just one set, which transforms almost imperceptibly from Parisian bar to train to villa through a series of subtle lighting changes, serves to highlight the music itself.  "I used the set to open up Andrew's own colossal score," Phillips said in an interview.  "It is one of his best - intricate, deep and varied and searingly accurate about the pain and pleasures of love." 

   The production afforded Phillips an opportunity to link the nonprofit Citadel with the high-stakes world of international theatre.  "There is a terrific opportunity for a Canadian circuit for this type of show," he said.  "We must come up with new ways to present theatre, especially now that government funding is not the greatest."  Aspects was co-produced by the Citadel in partnership with the Toronto-based Live Entertainment Corp. of Canada, which produced Phantom in Canada, and with Lloyd Webber's London-based Really Useful Theatre Co. Ltd., which also staged the New York version.  "This production comes out of Western Canada," said Live Entertainment chairman Garth Drabinsky, who negotiated with Webber's company to secure the Canadian rights.  "There is a vital implication here for all commercial theatres that private and nonprofit sectors can fuse successfully on projects." 

   The brisk sales for Aspects are a welcome development for Phillips, whose first full season at the theatre also includes the Shakespearean favorite Romeo and Juliet and the premiere of Calgary playwright John Murrell's Democracy, about the American Civil War.  But Citadel insiders say that many intangible benefits will also flow from attracting a big production by Lloyd Webber.  And the composer himself, who praised the Citadel as a "wonderful theatre space," said that he is anxious to stage another show there.  Vowed Lloyd Webber: "We'll do it again."  </I

   HISTORY AS DRAMA: Sir Wilfrid Laurier haunts a playwright 

   For a moment near the end of Laurier, a ghostly presence electrifies the stage at Toronto's Theatre Passe Muraille.  Dressed and made up to look like Sir Wilfrid Laurier, one of Canada's greatest prime ministers, Stephen Ouimette moves out of a spotlight and appears in vivid silhouette.  For a magical instant, his resemblance to Laurier - with the high forehead and flyaway hair so familiar from the $5 bill - transcends mere imitation.  It is as if the ghost of the dead politician had been caught in the act of manipulating events on stage.  The best of Laurier has that kind of urgency.  The fifth instalment of Toronto playwright Michael Hollingsworth's epic dramatization of Canada, The History of the Village of the Small Huts, the play examines issues of Laurier's time that are of pressing concern now: Quebec's place in Confederation and the question of what it means to be Canadian. 

   Hollingsworth, 41, claims that post-Meech Lake anxiety helped transform his play, which runs until July 21.  In a recent interview, he told Maclean's that he had originally intended to write a farce about Edwardian Canada.  But then, the constitutional crisis compelled him to explore Laurier's story more deeply.  He discovered that Laurier - who was prime minister from 1896 to 1911 - played a major role in shaping contemporary Canada.  "We tend to think that it's institutions and social movements that change the nature of the country," he said.  "But it's these wild, wired individuals who make things happen."  Added Hollingsworth: "Just look at Mulroney.  He promised he'd make Canada unrecognizable - and he has." 

   In his dark glasses and black vest, Hollingsworth exudes the tough-guy air of a gambler who tells it like it is.  He argues that if Laurier came back now and saw the predicament Canada is in, "he'd be so grossed out he'd be speechless."  In Hollingswoth's view, Laurier's greatest accomplishment was to transcend the forces of racial and religious divisiveness that have always threatened to tear Canada apart.  "Laurier defined Canada as a multinational state that believes in liberty," he said.  </I
   Preaching with Samir  
  ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT
  A REPORT BY GORDON NICKEL

   In the midst of sharing God's Word at a Baptist retreat on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria, Egypt, I had to ask myself once more what I had ever done to deserve this privilege.  Beside me, my enthusiastic translator, a veterinarian from Assiut, rendered my English into a melodious Arabic.  The Baptist young people sitting before me accepted the words they were hearing as God's message for them.  Through my northern European eyes, these Egyptian Arab evangelicals looked very attractive.  I felt it an honour to have them welcome me, a stranger, into their fellowship - never mind to have them invite me to preach! 

   Of course, I had done nothing to deserve the privilege, and that came back to me again and again as I enjoyed a nine-day visit to Egypt in August, 1995.  The entire trip was arranged by Samir Youssef, a Mennonite Brethren who pastors the Arabic Evangelical Church in New Westminster, B.C.  He had lived most of his life in Egypt, and only a few years ago immigrated to Canada with his wife Lewiza and sons David and Martin. 

   Samir had come to Egypt several weeks earlier and had arranged the schedule for us ahead of time.  My son Matthew and I arrived August 21.  We were on our way back from Pakistan, where we had worked for three weeks together with MB Missions/Services workers Tim and Janine Bergdahl in witness to the Baluch people in Karachi. 

   Samir met us at the Cairo airport and took us straight to the city of El-Fayyoum, where he was preaching in a Free Methodist church.  After two evenings there, we overnighted back to Cairo for a meeting in a lively church on the poor side of town.  Then we took the train to Upper Egypt for three days in Assemblies of God and Presbyterian churches in Assiut and Tema.  Finally we overnighted to Alexandria, for this Baptist retreat and for revival meetings in another Free Methodist church. 

   The Christians welcomed Matthew and me because they knew Samir.  Samir has many friends in Egypt through his earlier ministry as a pastor there.  His father was a famous pastor and leader in the Presbyterian Church in Egypt.  I saw that Samir is greatly loved by a wide variety of Christians in Egypt, and seemed to know just about everyone.  He is a fine evangelist and revival preacher, and it was great to see him in action.  Samir sings songs which inspire the people; when he preaches, he seems to have everyone in the palm of his hand with humour and emotional appeals, all the time taking full advantage of the beauty and rhythm of the Arabic language. 

   We met several former professionals who are now in full-time ministry because of Samir's encouragement.  When I talked with various evangelical church leaders, I was impressed with their strength of character and their competence in ministry.  Though they spoke in a very realistic way about the difficulties of being Christians in an extremist environment, they did not complain but rather testified that God is blessing the church.  During our days in Egypt, I saw a variety of very solid ministries done by the evangelical churches, including Christian education, radio witness and follow-up, development of discipleship materials, and compassionate ministries such as a large orphanage in Assiut. 

   Samir and I were glad to represent the Mennonite Brethren in Egypt, and during his stay Samir handed out to his church leader friends about 1000 copies of the Mennonite Brethren Confession of Faith.  When Samir had first accepted the MB Confession and joined the MB church, he had translated the Confession into Arabic.  The booklet he passed out in Egypt was thus "bilingual". 

   Church leaders read through the Confession and responded in thoughtful, interesting ways.  On one occasion, I was conversing with two young Baptist pastors, and told them that Mennonites have traditionally not participated in war or even in military training. 

   The pastors asked, "Do you still not participate in military training?" 

   "No, we still do not participate," Samir answered for us.  This is no insignificant point for Egyptian men, who are required by law to take two years of military training. 

   Preaching 11 times in eight days did not leave a lot of time for the sightseeing we wanted to do.  But Matthew and I were able to see the Sphinx and the Great Pyramid at Giza, and we spent an afternoon at a resort beside Lake Qaroun near El-Fayyoum.  Later on in the trip, we were able to do a bit of shopping in Alexandria and take a dip in the blue-green waters of the Mediterranean there. 

   On the last day of our time together, sitting in the living room of Samir's mother's apartment in Alexandria with a pleasant breeze blowing in through the open balcony doors, we reflected on the possibilities of European-background Mennonite Brethren and Arabic Mennonite Brethren doing something together in the Middle East. 

   "There are millions of people who need a ministry in Egypt," we agreed. "Our goal is to bring people to Jesus Christ.  We stand for a Believers' Church." 

   Samir and many Egyptian evangelicals have a special burden for members of the Orthodox Coptic Church who do not yet have the joy of knowing Jesus Christ.  When they speak of "evangelism", they normally have these people in mind. 

   Mennonite Brethren Missions/Services, on the other hand, has a desire to expand its gospel witness among Muslims, the religious group which makes up the majority of Egypt's population.  It was clear from our explorations that this kind of witness would only be possible through local Egyptian Christians themselves. 

   Considering an entry into a new region raises important questions about how we relate to local churches.  The Orthodox Coptic Church, for example, goes back to the time of the early church, and it has been faithful through nearly 1350 years of Muslim rule.  Another crucial question is how MB initiatives might relate to the established work of Mennonite agencies in the region, such as Mennonite Central Committee. 

   Samir and I didn't have the authority to make decisions in any case; we were only there to explore.  But that didn't stop us from dreaming together.  When Arabic Mennonite Brethren open up windows for us into a region where we have not yet worked as a church, might these not at some point become doors of opportunity?  It wouldn't be the first time that our non-European MB fellowships have led us into privileges of ministry which we've done nothing to deserve.  - Gordon Nickel, an instructor at Bethany Bible Institute in Hepburn, Sask. and an MBM/S consultant on outreach to Muslims.   </I

    AIDS crisis imperils Botswana; MBM/S missionaries call for prayer  
  BOTSWANA

   MBM/S missionaries in Botswana, Bryan and Teresa Born, have issued an urgent plea for prayer in September for the AIDS-decimated population of Botswana.  The country has the highest rate of HIV infection in the world.  (HIV is the virus which develops into AIDS, eventually resulting in death.) 

   In August, the Borns attended a gathering of ministers and health officials where the grim statistics, say the Borns, "broke our hearts and brought us to our knees."  The numbers are staggering; they represent a horrendous toll of human suffering, grief and death that threaten to wipe out Botswanan society. 

   50% of the students at the University of Botswana - the only university in the country - are HIV+.  Barring a major medical break-through, almost all the infected will die in 5-10 years. 

   In the major towns and cities, 40% of pregnant women test positive for AIDS; many of the children will be born under a sentence of death. 

   25% of all persons over 15 are infected.  Researchers fear that the figure will double in four years. 

   CHRISTIANS MOBILIZE  

   At the August meetings, the concerned Christians declared September a month of prayer and repentance.  Churches are being challenged to follow the pattern prescribed in II Chronicles 7:14: "If my people, who are called by my name, will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land." 

   Along with the call for national repentance, special events will be organized in major towns and villages.  Workshops will train the healthy "to take care of the sick and dying, as well as help the grieving," say the Borns. 

   PRESIDENT TO PROMOTE MORALITY  

   The president of Botswana, Sir Keitumile Masire, will open the educational campaign on September 1 with a speech decrying rampant sexual promiscuity and embracing "the biblical principles of abstinence before marriage and absolute faithfulness within marriage" . 

   Meanwhile, the Borns need fresh energizing from the Holy Spirit. 

   "We feel the battle," they write, "and at times we're exhausted and discouraged.  Please pray for us; this is a battle for the hearts souls and lives of this people."  North American Mennonite Brethren are urged to join the prayer crusade and write a note of encouragement to Bryan and Teresa Born, Box 10789, Selebi Phikwe, Botswana.  - Gary Hardaway   </I

    Mission adventure for Zaire Mennonite conferences  

   For many years Zaire Mennonite conferences concentrated most of their outreach efforts in Kinshasa, Bandundu and Kasai provinces.  In 1994, with the outbreak of ethnic conflicts in Rwanda, attention turned to eastern Zaire, first with humanitarian assistance and now for church planting in Bukavu, near the Great Lakes Region. 

   The three Mennonite conferences in Zaire, in collaboration with their partners, Mennonite Brethren Missions/Services, Africa Independent Mennonite Missions and Mennonite Central Committee are sending two couples into the region.  In affirmation, the MBM/S Board has allocated $5,200 to share in this partnership. 

   Two features of the Great Lakes Project are especially noteworthy. 

   1. The excellent advance work of two lay leadership couples already involved in organizing a local congregation.
  Fidel and Christa Lumeya were sent by MCC to work in the area as coordinator of MCC program in the region.  Before going to Bukavu, they were very involved in Kinshasa church life of the Zaire MB conference.
  Dr. and Mrs. Kalumuna were involved in a congregation in Kinshasa.  This tent-making couple went to Bukavu with the blessing and financial assistance from their congregation and with the hope of planting a church. 

   Thanks to these two couples, a local international congregation has fully organized in Bukavu with 50 people meeting each Sunday for worship.  A congregational Bible study meets each Friday evening. 

   2. Mission Training Through Local Structure.  In addition, two Mennonite pastor couples are getting ready to be sent to Bukavu as the first missionaries to the region.  Before starting, both couples are immersed in a nine-week training program especially designed for them by the International Missiology Center run by Dr. Nzash Lumeya.  Courses include Anabaptist history, history of the Great Lakes region, history of African religions, cultural anthropology, biblical theology of mission, conflict resolution, cross-cultural communication, personality studies, church administration and group dynamics. 

   "We praise God for the work being started in this region," declares MBM/S Regional Secretary for Africa, Pakisa Tshimika.  "The long term goal is to reach out not only to eastern Zaire but also to Rwanda and Burundi."  The organizers ask prayer support for: 
  local lay leaders involved in the young international congregation: Dr. and Mrs. Kalumuna; Christa and Fidel Lumeya; Mr. and Mrs. Tshihuluka; Brothers Francois, Namuira, Nyamulinduka and Ange. 
  involvement of Zairian and other leaders as resources in leadership training 
  patience, wisdom and endurance for the two couples being trained 
  availability of funds as promised by conferences and partners 
  peace and tranquillity in the region.  - Gary Hardaway   </I

    New Order Mennonites  
  John H. REDEKOP
   During the 26 years I lived in Waterloo County, Ontario, the Old Order Mennonites were a constant source of fascination, at times also of inspiration, and occasionally of disappointment.  The fascination related to their dogged determination to retain a distinctive and very old-fashioned lifestyle.  The inspiration arose from their insistence on being a separate, peaceful people who practised authentic simplicity and mutual assistance, and avoided all forms of vengeance.  The disappointment pertained to their preoccupation with externalities, especially dress codes, their rejection of compromise on non-essentials of the gospel, their adamant insistence on conformity, their apparent indifference to the Great Commission, and their general legalism.  </I
   THE REEL THING  
  Could the modern evils of TV and rock 'n' roll kill the vintage art of Celtic fiddling?  Not in Cape Breton, boys.  Now get yourself up on that floor, and let's have a go! 
  Article by ALFRED LEBLANC
  Photography by PATRICE HALLEY 

   The Saturday square dances in West Mabou, on the southwest coast of Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, would be enough to make poor old Father Kenneth MacDonald turn over in his grave.  A century ago, the local priest fought to stamp out fiddle music for its devilish influence.  Judging from the action tonight in this community hall, the music still has the power to possess. 

   As fiddler Kinnon Beaton powers into Michael Rankin's Reel, a yelp of glee comes from the floor.  "It's a sin to miss a dance," says 70-year-old Donnie MacDougall from nearby Inverness, pouring sweat from the last set.  "I'm at every dance, and I never miss a set."  In the third figure of the square set, the men and women peel away from each other, forming facing lines the length of the hall.  Then there's the swoosh and tap of shoes on worn plywood as partners stepdance back to each other.  After the set, the dancers clear space for Margie and Dawn Beaton, 9- and 12-year-old sisters from Mabou, to show off their steps.  They finish to a loud cheer and give way to 22-year-old Rodney MacDonald, who dances to spirited versions of Miss Lyle, Dail in the Kitchen, and other classic strathspeys and reels.  After a little coaxing, even 50-year-old Alex Hughie MacDonald from Judique gets up and has a go. 

   Traditional Celtic-style fiddling, piping, and stepdancing are thriving arts in Cape Breton.  In the summers, there are hundreds of square dances, concerts, and ceilidhs (parties) scattered about the island.  The Ceilidh Trail, running along the west coast, likely boasts more musicians per capita than anywhere else in Canada.  It is a rich cultural soil that has nurtured such musical greats as The Rankin Family, recent winners of four Juno awards, and 19-year-old Ashley MacIsaac, an innovative young fiddler just starting a recording career that could push the Cape Breton sound onto the world stage and into the 21st century.  So strong is the local tradition that the island's musicians are often invited to give workshops in Scotland to coach the founders in their own lost arts. 

 

   For every Cape Breton star who travels the world, there are dozens more musicians who stay home to play a vital role in local life.  To an area that has been economically depressed for generations, the Cape Breton fiddler brings self-forgetting joy.  The unique driving pulse of the music leads irresistibly to the dance, which sets spirits free.  "We live in the dark ages," says Patsi Palmer, who fell in love with Cape Breton's music and life and moved here from upstate New York.  "This music cheers people up.  This music is the doctor." 

   Cape Breton's Celtic music has a long history - and a resilient spirit that has seen it through some rough times.  Many of the tunes played by a fiddler such as 38-year-old Kinnon Beaton were imported by his forefathers when they first came from Scotland to Cape Breton during the Highland Clearances (the forced expulsion of sharecroppers) in the early 1800s, then passed down through the generations.  (Beaton's grandfather, Angus Ronald, and father, Donald Angus, were both great fiddlers.)  But during Beaton's own youth, fiddling became unfashionable.  As I witnessed myself while growing up in the late 1960s and early 1970s in Margaree Forks, television and rock 'n' roll seemed to be getting the upper hand.  The CBC made it official in a 1971 documentary lamenting "The Vanishing Cape Breton Fiddler." 

   "That show got a few of us mad," recalls Father John Angus Rankin, one of the music's biggest supporters in recent years.  "There were still many fiddlers around," he continues, "but they were in the woods.  It was just a matter of getting in touch with them."  To prove his point, Rankin got 100 fiddlers on stage for the first Glendale fiddle festival in 1973.  Since then, the music has made a comeback, slowly at first, then exploding in the past 10 years.  "When I started, you were made fun of if you played," says Beaton with a chuckle.  "Now you are made fun of if you can't play." 

   To sample the surviving heart and soul of the classic Cape Breton fiddling style, you could do no better than drop by one Thursday night at a tiny white parish hall at Glencoe Mills.  It is to this isolated spot that Cape Bretoners drive for miles, the last 10 along a dirt road, to catch Hugh "Buddy" MacMaster play.  Dressed typically in slacks and a dress shirt, 69-year-old Buddy shows little emotion as he looks over his fiddle at a swirl of happy faces dripping with sweat.  Though he has performed throughout North America and Europe - and has even taught at the Valley of the Moon School of Scottish Fiddling in California - this is his home turf; he has been working his magic here for 30 years. 

   Before this dance is over, Buddy will have played 150 tunes.  He couldn't tell you how many he knows in total; there are simply too many.  In her book Traditional Celtic Fiddle Music of Cape Breton, author Kate Dunlay ranks Buddy as "one of the greatest Scottish fiddlers ever to have lived."  Buddy's own assessment is typically modest: "There are so many good fiddle players around today, they wouldn't miss me if I stopped playing." 

   What makes a great Cape Breton player?  It's a combination of precise tricks with the bow, a rock-solid sense of rhythm that is perfect for the dance, and a rich repertoire of old Scottish tunes and Scottish-style compositions by Cape Breton composers.  While contemporary Scottish and Irish fiddlers are given to slurring the bow, Buddy executes more notes with single, or articulated, bow strokes.  He bounces his bow to produce several distinct notes without reversing direction or replaces some single notes with three "cuts" executed by rapid changes in bow direction.  "That's not written in the music, you know," says Buddy of the manoeuvres he picked up from older players when he was growing up.  Old-time Cape Breton fiddlers will also play notes to sound like bagpipes or play the same note on two strings at once to give a fuller sound.  The result is music with great drive and lift.  "If you're not dancing, you'd better pinch yourself, because you're probably dead," says fiddler and Inverness native Sandy MacIntyre. 

   Buddy fell in love with the music as a child, he says, listening in on visiting fiddlers at "kitchen rackets," or ceilidhs, in his parents' home, then going to bed jigging (mouthing) tunes to himself.  After starting to play at the age of 11, he soon advanced to performing at weddings and parties and at 14 played his first dance for money.  As an adult, Buddy spent 45 years working as a CN stationmaster, but music was his life. "Even while I was at work, music was on my mind all the time."  He has played regularly since 1949, in summer sometimes almost every night for weeks on end.  Despite decades of persuasion by friends and recording studios, he waited 50 years before putting out a tape: "I didn't think I could.  I never had the urge to record.  I was just satisfied to play." 

   In the hall at Glencoe Mills, Buddy is partway through John Morris Rankin's The Way to Mull River Reel when a slight smile of satisfaction crosses his face.  He has noticed 6-year-old fiddler Robbie Fraser sitting at the edge of the stage, looking up admiringly at his hero.  Fifteen years ago, Carmelita and Angus MacIsaac brought their 4-year-old son, Ashley, to soak up Buddy's music in this same hall.  I still recall attending a dance there some nine years later.  A new set was starting.  The music was good, but it wasn't Buddy.  I looked up to see a little fellow with curly brown hair, hardly big enough to hold the fiddle and looking awkward bowing with his left hand.  It was Ashley - a future great fiddler pumping away for all he was worth. 

   If Buddy is all that Cape Breton fiddling has been, Ashley is poised to become its somewhat controversial future.  He was raised as solidly as Buddy in the traditional style - stepdancing as a small child, taking up the fiddle at the age of 8, and practising like a fiend, sometimes till midnight.  But he also received some formal music training, made his first recording at 16, and moves readily from traditional duets with a pianist to more raucous experiments fronting a rock-'n'-roll band. ( During a typically furious performance in Halifax, he shocked purists by smashing and step-dancing on his fiddle.)  While the music is everything for Buddy and he keeps his own presence small, Ashley seems to know instinctively that the music will get him only so far.  "All I want to do is entertain people," he says - and if that means changing the music, it's okay by him. "If you pick it up for the crowd in Cheticamp, they love it.  If that is a cop-out, so be it.  I'd rather have people be entertained." 

   "Picking it up" is what Ashley is doing the afternoon of Christmas Eve at Le Gabriel Lounge in the bustling Acadian village of Cheticamp.  Ashley is sweating profusely, both feet pounding the floor and his body lurching.  There is a loud cheer as he slips a few bars from a Christmas carol into a traditional fiddle tune.  I can see why his father says, "He kills his piano players, because he never stops."  When he has worn out a few stepdancers who come forward, he gets up and stepdances to his own playing. 

   Ashley got his big break when he came to the attention of theatre director JoAnne Akalaitis and her husband, New York avant-garde composer Philip Glass, who have summered in Cape Breton for years.  "The music was flowing out of him as if it was the most natural thing in the world," recalls Glass of his first listen to Ashley.  He and Akalaitis were putting together a production of Georg Buchner's Woyzeck for the Joseph Papp Public Theater in New York and decided they wanted Ashley to fiddle and stepdance in it.  "It was a big decision for us to let him go [to New York]," says his mother.  That move and the friendship he formed with Glass opened up new possibilities.  He has already made two appearances at Carnegie Hall and has recorded with the likes of Paul Simon.  This fall, Ashley will release his own first major-label recording on A&M. 

   Some Cape Bretoners consider Ashley's new popularity a mixed blessing, fearing that foreign influences will corrupt Cape Breton's old-style fiddling.  "They're after changing the music," says 79-year-old Joe Kennedy, as he takes a break from playing me some tunes in his cluttered house deep in the woods near Inverside.  Kennedy also objects to the flamboyant body language of fiddlers such as Ashley in full-flight performance.  "The old fellows would stand right steady," he says. "Now their bodies swing every way, so wild.  Pounding away with their feet.  They're making too much noise with their feet." 

   Beyond the obvious theatrics, the younger generation of Cape Breton fiddlers are also changing the music in subtler ways.  Many now read music, and even more of them greatly emphasize precise technique and tonal clarity in their playing.  "With the modern ear, there has been some streamlining of the music," observes author Dunlay.  And because of the easy access to other music through recordings and travel, Cape Breton fiddlers now measure themselves against the international community and are more apt to pick up outside influences.  Irish fiddling, which can be very fast, has great impact.  Noting the foreign feel of some of the playing of his talented niece, Natalie, Buddy McMaster says, "She has been in with some Irish players." 

   An overarching concern of the purists is that the newer players are losing the ineffable sense of rhythm that makes Cape Breton fiddling perfect for the dance.  "The timing is getting ruined," worries Father John Angus Rankin.  "People are playing for the money.  If a lot of people follow Ashley, they'll all get faster and eventually the timing will get lost." 

   Sitting in a hotel restaurant in Toronto, Ashley sips a Coke and shifts about like a puppy as if to shake off the criticism.  "Those people who think I play too fast should listen to some of the old recordings, especially those of Angus Chisholm," he says, referring to a giant in the tradition.  </I
   FLATTENING OUT THE MEANINGS  
   The values of High Modernism are not quite as monolithic as the Mendel Gallery's current exhibit of art from Emma Lake implies  
  by Keith Bell 

   Review: The Flat Side of the Landscape: 
  The Emma Lake Artists' Workshops 
  The Mendel Art Gallery, Saskatoon 
  October 5 to November 19, 1989  

   The choice of the Emma Lake Artists' Workshops as the centrepiece exhibition for the Mendel Gallery's twenty-fifth birthday celebrations provides an appropriate occasion to consider the way in which artists, critics and historians have sought to construct the histories of Saskatchewan art since the nineteen thirties.  Before discussing the exhibition itself, it is appropriate to consider briefly how the art schools and workshops were organized and what their directors' and co-ordinators' particular agendas actually were. 

   Organized artistic activity in Emma Lake had in fact begun sometime before the workshops dealt with in the Mendel exhibition, when President Murray of the University of Saskatchewan had established the Murray Point School of Art in 1936.  The idea for the school originated with Augustus Kenderdine, a painter and lecturer in art at the university, who directed the annual camp until his death in 1947.  Kenderdine's own painting was based upon a European training in which the prairie landscape was colonized and appropriated to accord with the ideologies of western settlement during the nineteen thirties and forties.  The resulting paintings with their "romantic" view of the northern lakes and forests effectively formed the basis for the type of work produced by the students at the school, who included artists such as Joanne Gifford, Ingrid Kaldor, Isabel Kaldor, Ruth Roeher and Ruth Pawson. 

   These individuals, many of whom were teachers, produced and in numerous cases continued to produce work of considerable quality.  This output has subsequently been largely ignored, mainly because of the increasing institutionalization and professionalization of the provincial art community (the Murray Pointers were rarely "full time" artists), and the growing hegemony of Modernist art practices - as opposed to Kenderdine's academic training - particularly in the art departments on the Saskatoon and Regina campuses. 

   This attitude that the Murray Point school was at best of passing significance, is reflected in the catalogue to the current exhibition.  Here the extensive output and exhibiting activities of individuals who attended the school is marginalized as being of "less importance" than the later workshops, the production of "teacher artists" who are not quite of the appropriate status (i.e., professional) to belong to a history of Saskatchewan art.  This essay, whose evaluative title, "Beginnings: The Murray Point Summer School of Art 1936-1955," when taken with an unexplained token painting by Kenderdine at the beginning of the exhibition, indicates that the idea of an old fashioned evolutionary art history in which certain "styles" and artists are valorized over others, is not entirely absent from the construction put forward by the organizers of The Flat Side of the Landscape.  In this case, the Murray Point school is represented as a minor curtain raiser, a secondary event before the arrival of what another catalogue essayist, Terry Atkinson, calls the "grandees," the famous artists bringing Modernist art to the prairies from New York. 

   Fortunately, a sense of the kind of work produced by artists who attended the Murray Point school before 1955 can be obtained from another exhibition -  The Forgotten Emma Lake  - currently on view at the Gordon Snelgrove Gallery in the Department of Art and Art History at the University of Saskatchewan.  The exhibition is an initial study of the school, and contains work by the artists mentioned above as well as that of Mina Forsyth, who subsequently became a full professor in the University Art Department and who attended the summer school subsequent to Kenderdine's death.  The resulting exhibition, while by no means comprehensive, is an important first step in the retrieval of one of the early histories of Saskatchewan art. 

   During the years immediately following Kenderdine's death in 1947, the balance of power in the two Saskatchewan university art departments changed from an Anglo-Canadian one to a closer identification with the Modernist influences being promoted by the powerful art interests in New York.  This was effected in Saskatoon by the new department head, Gordon Snelgrove, a promoter of Modernism and an occasional visitor to the USA, who hired Nikola Bjelajac and the American artist Eli Bornstein to teach on the faculty.  They were followed later by a series of other American appointments, including Warren Peterson, Stanley Day and James Thornsbury, and by a new generation of Canadian-born artists, who like Otto Rogers and Mina Forsyth, or Kenneth Lochhead in Regina, were either trained in the USA, or looked to that country as a useful centre of exhibition and museum resources.  As a result of these events, the art institutions of the province were, therefore, largely re-oriented towards and in some cases colonized by the USA. 

   Given these circumstances, it is not surprising that when Kenneth Lochhead, the new director of the Regina College School of Art, proposed a new two-week workshop at Emma Lake, he looked to outsiders and ultimately to New York for the workshop leaders.  There was after all only a tiny audience and an even smaller market on the prairies for the kind of work being produced by the Modernist artists.  In order to establish themselves so far from the centres which supported this form of artistic practise, they needed not only the helpful artistic influence of famous imported Modernist "stars," but also critical recognition and gallery connections in Toronto, New York and elsewhere.  It is the workshops which resulted from those needs which are the subject of the Mendel Gallery's exhibition: The Flat Side of the Landscape: The Emma Lake Artists' Workshops.  

   Beginning with Canadian leaders, Jack Shadbolt and Joseph Plaskett in 1955 and 1956 respectively, the workshop coordinators then turned mainly to Americans like Barnett Newman (1959), Jules Olitski (1964) and Clement Greenberg (1962), and British participants, notably Anthony Caro (1977) and Terry Atkinson (1987).  From the long list of leaders who attended Emma Lake between 1955 and 1989, John O'Brian, the curator / editor of the exhibition, has selected five workshops which for reasons which I will examine he believes to be "pivotal:" those led by Shadbolt, Newman, Greenberg, Steiner and Dzubas / Elderfield.  This choice dictates the shape of the exhibition which is broken up into five sections, each representing one of the workshops and containing a small selection of works produced at or near the time of those workshops.  Accompanying the exhibition is an excellently produced catalogue containing five useful essays on various aspects of Emma Lake, together with entries on exhibited works, an extensive chronology, and a series of handy appendices listing the workshop leaders and participants - the Mendel Gallery has excelled itself. 

   In fact the history of Emma Lake is due for just such an extensive reassessment, particularly at a time when recent workshops have shown an increasing tendency to become inward looking and self-referential, an act of closure which is common in art on the margins as well as an inherent condition of late Modernism itself. 

   What then does the exhibition say about activities of the workshop, and how effective is it as an intervention in the histories of Canadian art?  In his catalogue introduction, John O'Brian proposes that the show is intended to "reclaim something of the complexity" of Emma Lake's history from the "litter of anecdotes and illusions" which surround the workshops.  The complexity and the anecdotes certainly exist but they are often more effectively dealt with in some of the catalogue essays than in the form of exhibition itself. 

   The clearest example of this difficulty lies in the selection of workshops for inclusion in the exhibition.  These were chosen, O'Brian says, because "observers" (which ones?) felt that they were "pivotal" (to whom?), and yet at the same time reflected a "sense" of continuity in the workshops from one year to the next.  Artists who were part of this continuity, who attended repeatedly, like Knowles, McKay and Christie, were therefore spotlighted.   While the parts of this statement suggest contradictory situations - pivotal after all implies a decisive change in direction - the opposite is closer to the truth.  For the workshops included in the Flat Side of the Landscape are those which first introduced Modernist practices at Emma Lake (Shadbolt, Newman, Greenberg) and then reasserted that same ideology (Steiner, Dzubas / Edlerfield) on those occasions when its purity was either challenged (by Judd in 1968), or appeared to be diluted by the workshops of the mid-seventies.  The result is an exhibition which, far from showing the complexity of the workshops, instead firmly situates itself within a Modernist selective tradition whose most distinctive characteristic is its attitude of closure or exclusion with regard to other artistic discourses. 

   In the case of the Emma Lake exhibition, this means that the workshops which do not fit into this tradition, or indeed were intended to ease the logjam of Modernist ideology, are marginalized or ignored.  These include workshops led by Donald Judd (1968), R.B. Kitaj (1970) and the mid-seventies series co-ordinated by Ray Allen, who sought to achieve a wider mix of approaches to the process of art production.   In each case there were artists for whom the workshop was important, while the art community in the province was exposed to a fresh set of ideas.  By the late seventies these kinds of workshops were probably more useful than the specifically Modernist ones which reappeared in the eighties.  O'Brian's opinion of the importance of the latter is unclear, although his decision not to include any of the post-1979 workshops in the Flat Side of the Landscape could perhaps be seen as a statement of his own position. 

   The same flattening out of the meanings of Emma Lake also recurs in the choice of works for the exhibition.  Because of the emphasis on the continuity and stylistic homogeneity of the workshops, the complexity of the activities which took place in the studios at Emma Lake is lost.  For example, John Nugent, a participant at the Shadbolt and Greenberg workshops, is not included because his work is "liturgical" and therefore does not fit with the flat, non-objective (and rather poor in the case of the Greenberg session) paintings which were used to represent that continuity. 

   Similarly, the large number of women who attended the workshops are also at best thinly represented.  While John O'Brian rightly states that the project of Modernism favours male control and effectively marginalizes women who are artists, the exhibition itself simply repeats this process.  The work of relatively few women is included, and the catalogue essays do not address the problem effectively.  The opportunity for a useful intervention in the discourses of Emma Lake has been missed. 

   That this issue was, and is, an important one is evident from the response of a former participant, Andrew Hudson, who, in a panel discussion on the exhibition, responded to a question of why so few workshop leaders were women, by suggesting a round of applause for the wives of artists (note the gendering of artists here) who worked so that their husbands could concentrate on success in the art world. 

   The result of the kinds of exclusion referred to above is an exhibition which seeks to represent the Emma Lake "tradition" as a series of manoeuvers with the dominant aesthetic of Modernism.  All the awkward edges are smoothed away and the triumph of the critical theories propounded by the New York writer, Clement Greenberg, becomes the central agenda of the exhibition; an agenda reinforced by the presence of paintings by the early "grandees" of Modernism who were imported to lead the workshops.  While this is only one possible representation among several, as O'Brian with reference to Edward Said, the author of Orientalism, remarks, it is nevertheless the only one which will be seen and which will therefore be assumed to have stood for the "real" history of the Emma Lake workshops. 

   While the exhibition is problematic, the accompanying catalogue essays provide a more effective forum for addressing the issues surrounding Emma Lake.  </I
 

 <I
  Bach to Basics 
  Tafelmusik is true to the original 

   Those who still think that "early music" means dry, fussy performances on scratchy, out-of-tune instruments need only hear a Tafelmusik performance to understand how compelling period instruments can be.  Interest in "how Bach would have heard it" is only part of the reason why musicians like those in Tafelmusik, Toronto's baroque orchestra on period instruments, have spent so much time and energy mastering the intricacies of the old instruments and why their annual audience of 50,000 keeps coming back for more. 

   The music of the 17th and 18th centuries was written to be played on instruments constructed quite differently from those normally used today.  In the hands of accomplished players these instruments almost always make for naturally convincing performances, especially in terms of balance and tonal blend.  This is because they produce different sounds than those of modern orchestral instruments: lighter and less imposing sounds, which are also more subtle and colourful. 

   Now that period-instrument ensembles are firmly established in the musical life of Europe and North America, all that groups like Tafelmusik ask of a new audience member is that he or she take the performance on its own terms and ask themselves: is the music pleasing or not?  More and more, concert-goers who never expected to be captivated by such a seemingly esoteric approach are saying that it is very pleasing indeed. 

   In fact, once settled into the red cushions at Toronto's Trinity-St. Paul United Church, audience members find it hard not to be pleased.  The warmth of the surroundings matches the warmth of the ensemble onstage; there is no mistaking the fact that the musicians are having fun.  Since the ensemble normally has no conductor (music director Jean Lamon directs from her place at the head of the first violins), the players must relate to one another as they would when performing chamber music.  The resulting involvement in the music is heightened by the fact that in most of Tafelmusik's repertoire each member of the ensemble is frequently allowed - even expected - to improvise ornamentation and new melodic lines. 

   Tafelmusik is now entering its second decade with all the energy and ambition that it had in its very first season eleven years ago.  Although the orchestra is larger and many of its members have changed, the drive to be the best and to show the world what it can do has remained constant.  In the beginning the ensemble - founders Ken Solway (baroque oboe) and Susan Graves (baroque bassoon) with friends they gathered together - were happy to play in whatever venues they could find.  The move to Trinity-St. Paul in the orchestras third season brought some stability to the ensemble, although the building seemed to mirror the group's situation: full of spirit but a little ragged at the edges. 

   The church's fortunes have improved with those of the orchestra and now shining wooden staircases, long pews with red seat cushions and a refurbished 'backstage' area all reflect the polish and success which have come to Tafelmusik in the last few years under Jean Lamon's leadership.  Where once the orchestra had to work hard to half fill their halls, they now present each subscription concert two and sometimes three times.  Run-out appearances around southern Ontario have turned into world-wide tours to some of music's most prestigious centres.  Most important, those heartfelt but sometimes scrappy early appearances have become thoroughly accomplished, energetic performances by up to 23 people as Tafelmusik's repertoire has expanded beyond the baroque to include the symphonies of Haydn and his contemporaries. 

   Of great importance is the fact that the core group of twelve string players and one harpsichordist receives a full-time salary and is able to devote its entire attention to the ensemble, unlike most period-instrument orchestras.  In fact, San Francisco's Philharmonia is the only other North American baroque orchestra that can afford to operate this way.  

   The schedule for Tafelmusik's current season shows the variety and careful planning which has always been the group's hallmark under the direction of long-time general manager Ottie Lockey.  Guest soloists include both world-famous performers such as the conductor and harpsichordist Ton Koopman, besides less well known artists - like soprano Ann Monoyios - who are nonetheless first class musicians.  

   This season's programs include old favourites (one of Bach's Brandenburg Concertos) as well as more unusual repertoire (a concert presentation of Handel's opera Floridante) and a performance of one of the greatest and most difficult masterpieces of the Baroque, Bach's Mass in B minor. 

   Tafelmusik continued its traditional heavy touring schedule with a visit to several American music festivals in November 1989.  They embarked on a cross-Canada tour in January and, to cap the season, a three-week European tour (the orchestra's fifth) in June.  As well, a ground-breaking trip to the Far East is planned for next November. 

   These tours are important to the orchestra not only in financial terms (unlike larger and more unwieldy ensembles, Tafelmusik's touring helps pay the bills for its home-town concert series).  They also bring the somewhat specialized world of period-instrument performance to communities that would otherwise have little access to such music-making. 

   Tafelmusik's recent agreement to record for the international BMG (formerly RCA) group on the Deutsche Harmonia Mundi label gives the orchestra the opportunity to reach thousands of new listeners all over the world.  The infectious nature of the orchestra's live performances comes through on their first two recordings for BMG, six Concerti Grossi by Arcangelo Corelli and Concerti and Symphonies by Luigi Boccherini with Dutch cello soloist Anner Bylsma. 

   Critical reaction to these discs has been very favourable.  Tess Knighton in Gramophone magazine comments that in the Corelli performances "virtuosity and vitality are both present in generous quantities" and chooses the album as one of the best of the year, while Nils Anderson in Fanfare enthuses that the disc is "a joy from beginning to end" and that "the [recorded] sound is broad and clean with fine ambience". 

   With the release of these recordings, almost anyone can now have easy access to Tafelmusik, whether in concert at Trinity-St. Paul, on tour - or at home in front of the stereo. 
 
 </I

 <I
   I picked up one of her books.  It was The Thinking Body.  "What's this about?".
  "About relaxing, partly.  When you're sitting, standing - even jogging." 

   She stood up and began jogging up and down the room.  "Like this," she said.  She let her wrists go limp and her arms fly about.  Inside her white robe other parts of that marvellous body jiggled and jounced around.  I was so totally stunned by all this activity I didn't even think to raise my camera.  I realized later that it would have been useless.  I would have needed a motion-picture camera to record this memorable performance.  In slow motion. 

   Marilyn returned to her mirror.  "Speaking of relaxation, I went to a Yoga church for a while.  They teach complete relaxation, and there are a lot of good things in it.  But I don't go for complete nirvana.  They finally reach a state of desired nothing.  Not now.  I hope to reach that stage when I'm old, maybe.  

   Marilyn stopped putting on her make-up and stared quietly out the window for a good five minutes.  She had apparently been thinking about her childhood, for somewhat irrelevantly she asked, "Was it Freud who said that parents are the psychological murderers of their children?" 

   Marilyn's childhood had been an unhappy one: a father who disappeared before she was born; a mother she barely knew, who was hospitalized for mental illness; an orphanage; a series of foster homes, one run by religious fanatics and another where she was molested by an elderly boarder who gave her a nickel "not to tell".  When she told, she was punished - for telling a lie. 

   Today, Marilyn chose to dwell on some of the happier moments.  "I didn't have much school, you know."  

   She returned to her make-up, applying eye shadow to the top of her eyelids and soft pastel lipstick from a small jar.  She fastened on false eyelashes, half-length, extending from the middle of her eyes to the outer edge. 

   As I was making notes, Marilyn said, "I'll just give you the last verse of one.  The rest is too personal.  She recited:   O, Time
Be Kind.
Help this weary being
To forget what is sad to remember.
Loose my loneliness, Ease my mind, While you eat my flesh.  
  It was my turn to fall silent. 

   Marilyn finished her make-up and disappeared into the bathroom to shed her white robe.  She reappeared in slacks and a low-cut red blouse that buttoned up the back, but was undone. 

   Turning around, she said, "Do me up the back."  This I managed, with some fumbling. 

   Marilyn propped herself up on her bed.  "I know what," she said, "I have to learn to smoke a cigarette for my next picture.  Give me a cigarette and you can take pictures of me practising. 

   "Now, this is my French inhale," she demonstrated.  Here's how I roll the cigarette from one side of my mouth to the other with my tongue."  

   She ran through pose after pose and I shot off a whole roll of film.  For the final picture she leaned forward directly into the camera - and winked one eye. 

   As we finished, there was a knock at the door.  I opened it and found Frank Neill in an excited state.  He looked at my cameras and before entering he muttered to me in an aside, "Boss, we got a big deal going.  Don't screw this up."  Having no intention of screwing anything up, I retreated to a chair in the corner of the room. 

   Alive with excitement, Neill turned to Marilyn.  "Honey, we got a real good break.  Hy Gardner wants to use you on his coast-to-coast show tonight.  Along with Vice President Barkley.  He's going to phone here now and tape an interview."  

   "All right, Butterball," said Marilyn.  "But you talk to him first and find out what questions he's going to ask me.  I don't want him to ask questions about Joe." 
  "Fine, honey." 

   Neill picked up her phone and sat down on the bed beside her.  It took some time for Neill to get through to New York and the connection was apparently not very good because eventually he was shouting. 

   Neill put his hand over the mouthpiece.  "Honey, he says this thing between you and Joe is the hottest thing in New York - " 
  "I don't care, Butterball," said Marilyn.  "I don't care!  After all, this is my personal life.  And I know Joe wouldn't like it.  If he wants to mention Joe's name, I won't do it, that's all." 

   Neill removed his hand from the mouthpiece.  "HELLO, HY?  LOOK, HY, MARILYN DOESN'T WANT ... YES ... YES.  DON'T THINK I DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT, HY.  I AGREE WITH YOU BUT ...  OKAY, I'LL ASK HER."  He covered the phone again.  "Will you talk about baseball?" 
  "Sure.  I'll talk about baseball." 

   Marilyn crouched on the bed and put her head beside Neill's ear so she could overhear Hy Gardner's voice. 

   "HY?  YES BASEBALL IS OKAY, HY.  WHAT? ...  YES, JUST A MINUTE."  He spoke to Marilyn.  "While you're talking about baseball, can he ask just one question about Joe?" 
  Marilyn shook her head back and forth.  While they huddled over the phone I took a picture.  I think it was the first time I ever tried to photograph a telephone conversation. 

   In the lull, Marilyn appealed to me.  "Don't you think I'm right?  I don't want to turn my personal life into publicity.  I know Joe wouldn't like it.  It's not right." 

   Neill covered the phone again.  "Can he ask you about Butch?"  Butch was DiMaggio's child by his first marriage.  

   Marilyn put her hand to her forehead in despair.  

   "All right, honey.  All right, honey," Neill soothed.  He spoke into the phone again.  "HY?  NO ...  YES, I AGREE WITH YOU, HY.  BUT - NO.  YES ... ALL RIGHT ... JUST A MOMENT"  He handed the phone to Marilyn.  "He wants to talk to you." 

   Marilyn took the phone.  She listened.  "Yes, I do understand."  She listened some more.  "I would like to help you.  But not at the expense of someone else.  No.  All right.  I'm sorry.  Goodbye." 

   She put the phone down.  "He's going to skip it.  He'll get somebody else." 
  Neill wiped a hand over his face.  "It wouldn't have hurt," he said regretfully.  "It's a big show." 

   Marilyn became upset.  "Frank!" she cried.  "This is my personal life!  They wouldn't ask Jean Peters about Howard Hughes!  He wanted to ask me about Butch!  I think that's terrible!  I don't care that much about publicity!  If you like I'll phone up Spyros Skouras!" 
  Skouras was then the tsar of the movie industry.  

   Neill held up his hands to stem the flow of words.
  "Honey, it's perfectly all right.  We're only trying to look after you.  Remember, you're ours now." 
  That was the end of picture-taking for that day. 

   A day or two later the three of us were together again.  Marilyn finished work early and there was some time for a walk around Niagara for some sightseeing pictures. 

   Neill was full of ideas.  "You could be buying some postcards.  You'll probably want some anyway." 
  "No thanks," said Marilyn. 

   We came to some giant pay binoculars lined up along the Niagara Gorge for close-up viewing of the Falls.  Neill suggested this would make a good photo. 

   "I'd like to take a look through them," said Marilyn, "but no photos.  That's corny.  Like in New York they say, 'Look up at the skyscrapers.'  Do they think you've never seen a skyscraper before?  I like pictures that have some warmth, some human quality to them." 

   After Marilyn had peered at the Falls, we continued our stroll until we came to a poster advertising the Maid of the Mist boat ride.  On the spur of the moment, Marilyn announced that she wanted to make the boat trip.  Neill said he had another appointment and he left Marilyn and me to make our way down to the Maid of the Mist landing at the river's edge. 
  

      CHAPTER ONE  
        THE STUDY OF OPEN SETTLEMENTS IN
NEW ZEALAND PREHISTORY      
  R.C. Green
      Introduction    
    Examination of a major settlement type, called kainga
in Maori, has experienced a rather uneven development in New
Zealand archaeology.   Until recently most excavation
programmes have focused on early, portable artefact-rich beach
middens or later, more massive, fortified sites.   Open or
undefended settlements, although now frequently recorded in
field surveys, have seldom been systematically studied.
  The reasons for this are explored in this introduction
which serves as a background to a set of articles on a series
of excavations designed to investigate the matter in detail in
the Pouerua Archaeological Project (Sutton 1982, 1983a, 1984a,
1985&semi; Preface, this volume).    
      The Ethnographic Baseline    
    Archaeologists have inherited the ethnographic
distinctions made by writers like Firth (1959:92) and Buck
(1949:137) between a defended or fortified position termed a
pa and an unprotected or unfortified village called a kainga.
  However, Buck was careful to state that an individual
residence was properly called kainga, as were any number of
huts collectively (c.f. Williams 1975:81), the term pa only
applying when settlements were protected by defensive works.
  Although the exigencies of the natural conformation of the
site were presumed to have had a predominant effect on the
arrangements of elements within fortifications, Firth
(1959:92) claimed the internal structure of a settlement for
  'both pa and kainga exhibited the same essential
features'  .   These were a number of rectangular
huts, ordinary ones in pole and thatch and those of better
construction with worked timbers in the wharepuni style, plus
one or more larger such houses of a superior kind, ranged in a
scattered fashion round a central place or marae area.
  Superior houses may have included some chiefly or guest
house dwellings and normally a meeting house (whare runanga),
usually carved (whare whakairo).   Raised pataka or carved
storehouses on piles also held a prominent position, while
cooking sheds, elevated stages for food storage (whata) and
underground pits for root crops such as sweet potato (rua
kumara) were scattered around the margins.   A tuahu or
sacred place and a latrine were found in more secluded
locations.  
    The difficulty with this ethnohistorically based and
somewhat composite description was that open village
settlements were seen as more or less duplicating pa, except
in the presence of defences, and that it was thought both
types of settlement typically possessed a large number of
dwellings and exhibited a high degree of residential
permanence.   In a detailed review of the ethnohistoric
accounts of the initial contact period in the late 18th
century A.D. and those of the protohistoric period in the
early 19th century, Groube (1965:35-6&semi; 64-71) effectively
challenged the view that the classic ethnographic
reconstruction of the kainga as set out above applied to
traditional Maori society at the time of contact.   In his
view   'fully developed kainga or undefended
villages'   as a typical Maori settlement form were
developed following contact with the Europeans and changes in
methods of warfare and economy (Groube 1965:70).   They were
not the usual late prehistoric settlement form as many had
assumed.   At the time of contact pa and kainga differed in
more than defensive arrangements.   Each catered in
different ways for a highly mobile population involved in
impermanent seasonal occupation of all types of settlements.
  Populations drew together in larger numbers within pa only
under conditions of warfare or threat of attack.   While
Groube 's arguments were well supported by the ethnohistoric
evidence, there was at the time only meagre archaeological
evidence for either period to back up these claims.
  Large-scale excavations of either early historic or
prehistoric open villages, or even of smaller undefended
settlements, with evidence of the essential details on housing
were lacking.  
    For the category covered by the traditional
prehistoric Maori concepts of kainga, Groube suggested the
following reconstruction based on the earliest European
accounts.   The domestic unit or household at approximately
1769 consisted   'of three or four houses, forming a
cluster or compound with associated cooking, dumping and
latrine sites'   (Groube 1965:43).   The possibility
of individual houses or pairs of houses scattered across the
landscape in a homestead pattern was considered, but not
pursued as isolated dwelling houses of the permanent kind were
seldom observed (Groube 1965:43).   In contrast, temporary
'huts' were frequently recorded, but as they were only of
passing interest to European observers there are few detailed
descriptions (Groube 1965:41-2).   Some were round, some of
lean-to construction, and others of rectangular floor plan
(Prickett 1982a:116).   More substantial dwellings were
often clustered at what Groube (1965:46) termed the communal
level.   He argued for the use of the term hamlet, rather
than village, and defined hamlets as usually comprising no
more than five or six huts and two domestic units.   These
were thought to be the normal form of kainga or undefended
hamlet in existence at the time of contact, although because
of the occasional vague but positive reference to larger
settlements, Groube (1965:49) allowed for the existence of
some communal units larger than the hamlet which were not
defended and could be called villages.  
      Identification of Dwellings    
    As archaeologists began to excavate fortified sites
and undefended settlements in a more extensive fashion, they
suffered another frustration.   On the basis of the
ethnographic and ethnohistoric record it was expected that
both categories of site would contain various kinds of
dwellings.   Yet structural evidence showed that most of the
features present were underground pits.   This led to the
interpretation that large pits were 'pit houses' or  'sunken
dwellings'.   While that interpretation has now generally
been rejected (Groube 1965:80-104&semi; Fox 1974) and most, if not
all, underground pits are currently seen as storage devices,
archaeological definition of surface dwellings conforming to
the ethnographic descriptions was slow in coming.  
    Although for the contact period Groube (1965:36-41)
summarised descriptions of Maori housing into two sizes of
dwelling, he could produce little in the way of archaeological
house plans in support of them.   Prickett (1982a:111) has
argued that Groube 's reappraisal of the traditional forms of
Maori settlement pattern in prehistory and the types of houses
present may have involved an over-reaction to the classical
descriptions of Best, Firth and Buck.   He adopts a more
flexible view.   His 'Archaeologist 's Guide to the Maori
Dwelling' is the best summary of the ethnohistoric
observations on housing from the contact period into the early
19th century.   Prickett takes the view that dwellings are
conservative in form, possessing important symbolic and
behavioural attributes which maintain that situation, and
therefore that habitations of the wharepuni form have a long
history in New Zealand.   Archaeological support for this
position has slowly accumulated and was brought together by
Davidson (1984:151-8).   Isolated examples of a handful of
archaeologically attested well-built dwellings with worked
timbers in the wharepuni form dating from the 12th to the
early 19th century are illustrated (Davidson 1984: Figure 97),
and McCulloch and Trotter (1984) have added another South
Island example.   In addition Davidson (1984: Figure 101)
provides plans for a selection of the several dozen less
substantial, probably pole and thatch, house outlines
recovered from both open settlements and pa of various
periods.   Only in the well-built worked timber houses of
the wharepuni style, and then in not all of these, has the
four-sided hearth, outlined in stone been found.   Groube
(1965:44) regarded this feature as   'an important type
fossil of the Classic Maori'   house site.   In the
other smaller and less substantial structures, a scoop
fireplace is the more common form.  
    In summary, if one was going to define domestic units
or households, hamlets, and villages on the number, form, and
size of their dwellings in association with other structural
elements, then finding and excavating dwellings was a crucial
task which it has taken New Zealand archaeologists several
decades to accomplish even in a minimal way.  
      Undefended Settlements and Site
Surveys    
    More readily accomplished was the identification and
field recording of open sites from associated features other
than dwelling remains, especially pits, terraces, middens, and
cooking areas singly and in various combinations.   Whereas
pa were once the principal settlement type recorded in most
field surveys, it soon became evident from the more intensive
and systematic form of site surveys undertaken in the last 15
years that undefended settlements in a variety of forms, many
of them representing hamlets, were in fact the more common
category in most regions.   In local areas ratios and
densities between fortified sites and open settlements varied
enormously.   Davidson (1984:167&semi; Figure 109), for example,
records that the island of Motutapu, with about 1500 hectares,
has over 200 widely distributed hamlets and only ten pa.
  Irwin (1985:4-17&semi; Figures 3, 6-9) documents in similar
detail the same kind of situation for a number of other North
Island areas such as the South Kaipara, Herekino/Whangape,
Mahurangi Harbour, East Waiheke Island, and the northern end
of Great Mercury Island.   Based on data resulting from 62
intensive field surveys of sites in the Northland and
Coromandel regions, he found that no less than 108 different
site types, most of them undefended, were described, with much
of the variation arising from terms and distinctions drawn by
individual recorders.   These he was able to rationalise to
some degree, reducing the total number by various combinations
of the data to 28 site types that could be subjected to
statistical analysis.   Still, while revealing some regional
and environmentally based patterning, the results exhibited
much randomness due to the arbitrary nature of the
classification.   As he observes, pa fall naturally into a
group which is amenable to further analysis but:
      The classification of undefended sites is
more problematical.   Firstly, their qualitative distinction
from defended sites may be artificial.   Secondly, while as
an undifferentiated group, their spatial distributions promise
coherence, further classification has its problems (Irwin
1985:17).      
Thus from an analytical point of view, the interpretation of
open settlements based on field surveys is still in its
infancy, in contrast to pa where there is a long history of
developments in taxonomy, analysis, and interpretation.  
    The difficulties of making a distinction during a
field survey between defended and undefended sites solely on
surface evidence is, of course, well known.   Investigations
on those sites which are hard to classify, such as Maioro (Fox
and Green 1982) and Waikere Creek (Irwin 1985:23), as well as
possible pa, have shown that only excavation will reveal the
presence of palisade defence, and that sites often change
their functions several times during their history,
  'being at different times an undefended base village,
a defended base village, and a defended store'  
(Davidson 1984:168).   Indeed, pit and terrace sites similar
to N33/217 at Pouto seem sometimes to function as pa within a
settlement pattern though their natural defences may appear
poor.   Moreover, excavation evidence may only make it more
difficult to decide if they are judged in isolation (Irwin
1985:23).   The qualitative distinction between the two
categories has both an historical and a contextual
dimension.  
      Excavations of Undefended Base
Settlements    
    Davidson (1984:166) states that   'the base
village or hamlet was probably a fundamental unit of
settlement throughout New Zealand prehistory'  .   The
list of well-excavated sites she is able to use to support
this claim is, however, rather limited.   Several early
settlements of this kind are known from the Palliser Bay
region (Leach and Leach 1979:251-3&semi; 266).   At one unit of
the early Moikau village, a substantial house in the wharepuni
style was found, associated with a slight terrace for cooking
and storage pits (Prickett 1979).   At the later
Makotukutuku Cross site a similar house with a central line of
postholes was uncovered on a ridge-top terrace adjacent to a
raised pit with other terraces, stone walls and mounds in the
flat below (Leach 1979:120-4).   At the early Washpool
Midden site postholes outlining cooking sheds were recovered
amidst a range of other structural features - drying racks,
pits, burials, hearths and ovens - plus rich midden debris and
numerous portable artefacts (Leach 1979:81-111).   Others
from the Coromandel Peninsula are the Sarah 's Gully and
Skipper 's Ridge settlements, late 'Archaic' sites now assigned
to the period of Expansion and Change, which were excavated by
Golson and his colleagues during the early stages of modern
archaeological investigations in the North Island of New
Zealand.   Only the latter of these has been subsequently
published (Davidson 1975).   While storage pits and
associated features like working areas, midden, scoop
fireplaces and ovens were identified as elements in the sites,
posthole patterns clearly defining dwellings were not
detected.   Slightly later sites listed by Davidson include
the pit, terrace, and midden complex at Aotea (Fox and Cassels
1983) and the physically separate low flat-topped knoll with
its pits, drains, fence post alignments, midden and terraces
lying below the pa at Hamlin 's Hill on the Auckland isthmus
(Davidson 1970a&semi; Irwin 1975&semi; Pearce 1977&semi; Walton 1979&semi; Nichol
1980&semi; Pearce and Walton 1983).   This time, along with the
usual features, convincing posthole plans for pole and thatch
houses and various less substantial sheds were recovered (Fox
and Cassels 1983:95-6&semi; Nichol 1980:218-23).   Much later but
similar sites of the Traditional period are documented by two
examples from Motutapu Island, one of which yielded evidence
for a fairly rudimentary form of dwelling (Leahy 1972&semi;
Davidson 1970b).  
      There are some other published examples of open
settlement excavations that could be added to this list.
  An early Traditional period one is at Kauri
Point.    2         2  
  There, aligned pits plus middens and other features, along
with postholes, defined a probable above ground dwelling which
went unrecognised (Green 1963a).   However, a line of major
postholes in squares B and C, rows 2 and 3, paralleling the
alignment of the pits, and some stakeholes to one side of this
line probably represent such a structure.     A
great concentration of terrace and pit complexes of varying
complexity demarcating a landscape intensively covered in open
settlements was recorded in the region of Kawerau and a number
of them investigated in detail (Phillips 1981&semi; Furey 1981&semi;
Lawlor 1981, 1984).   Again storage pits in a bewildering
variety of forms were discovered (Lawlor 1983).   Evidence
for surface houses has proved difficult to identify but at one
site some satisfying examples of several houses and a shelter
have been uncovered (Lawlor 1984:243).  
    Two things stand out from a survey of the literature
on well-conducted excavations of undefended base hamlets and
villages.   One is that very few sites of this type have in
fact been excavated, and of those only some have encompassed
really extensive areas.   The other is that the recovery of
evidence for housing in them, as is general in New Zealand
prehistoric sites (see above), has been patchy, at best.
  Another less obvious outcome is that very few of these
excavations have ever produced evidence of multiple dwellings
at the one site, although discovery of numbers of storage pits
is common.  
      Developments Elsewhere in Polynesian
Archaeology    
    Several developments elsewhere in Polynesian
archaeology appear to bear on the issues under consideration
here.   One is the convergence throughout Polynesia on the
household unit or the family-based residential complex as a
fundamental component in settlement pattern studies of Easter
Island, Samoa, Hawai'i and the Society Islands, to name some
of the better-studied examples (for fuller discussion with
references see Green 1984).   Another is the realisation
that large highly nucleated villages were uncommon in
pre-European Polynesia (Green 1970&semi; Bellwood 1979:315).
  Instead a more dispersed form of domestic unit prevailed.
  There was some concentration of these units around people
of rank.   These occurred in association with various
specialised structures, such as marae (Green 1970:32).
  Thus the pattern proposed by Groube for the Traditional
period in New Zealand proves to be quite typical of the later
prehistoric settlement patterns elsewhere in Polynesia.
  The domestic unit is the principal component in all cases.
  Intensive ethnohistoric studies have been made of the form
and function of various kinds of housing recorded at the time
of European contact in the Society Islands (Orliac 1982),
Hawai'i (Apple 1971) and the Chathams (Sutton 1983b).
  These assist greatly in the interpretation of
archaeological remains from those groups and add considerably
to the extensive but more general 20th-century ethnographic
literature on this subject.   Also in these residential
complexes the stone slab-outlined fireplace or oven in various
forms has been found to be of general Polynesian occurrence
(Green 1979), not something restricted to domestic units in
New Zealand or, in the Easter Island case, supposedly derived
from South America.  
    Perhaps of equal importance to the New Zealand
situation is the attempt by Hawaiian archaeologists to
distinguish between those sorts of habitation structures which
were temporary dwellings or temporarily occupied field
shelters and those which were of a more substantial and
permanent residential kind (Green 1980:54-63&semi; Cordy
1981:54-84).   It seems clear that, as in New Zealand,
people in prehistoric Hawaii spent a portion of their time
living in temporary shelters near their gardens, which were
often at some remove from their permanent residences.   As a
result some of the most common kinds of sites now recorded in
intensive surveys in Hawai'i are of these less substantial
forms.   They are quite different from the well-constructed
thatched Hawaiian house of the standard ethnographies, few of
which have yet been documented through excavation.   Again,
ethnographic reconstructions drawing heavily on early
19th-century accounts have not proved an entirely reliable
guide to late prehistoric dwellings as recovered through
archaeology.   The Hawaiian experience suggests, however,
that archaeological evidence of the various forms of
ethnohistorically poorly described temporary dwellings may be
as common in New Zealand as in Hawai'i, and that developing
criteria that allow one to distinguish between these two
residential categories may prove just as difficult in New
Zealand as in Hawai'i.   Certainly, as Davidson 's (1984:159)
review of existing archaeological evidence in New Zealand for
such structures documents, not many have been excavated and
  'few reconstructions of "temporary shelters" have been
proposed'  , despite their presumed ubiquity based on
the ethnohistoric references to temporary huts.  
      Pouerua Open Settlements    
    The above context places the study of open settlements
at Pouerua in its proper perspective.   First, one has in
this 9 square-kilometre block a high survival of remains from
the prehistoric period which has left a reasonably intact
archaeological landscape.   The extensive and detailed
mapping of this at the level of structural features, rather
than by site (however defined), means that a very large number
of open settlements have been identified in relation to
associated gardening complexes, peripheral defensive units,
and the main volcanic cone pa of Pouerua itself.   Next, a
wide range of variation can be established for these open
settlements, from the simplest cut terrace platform on a
hillock, or slight depression across a low lying ridge spur,
to a complex of terraces, flats and depressions ranging from
possible to almost certain subterranean store pits.
  Moreover, on the flat areas of many of these sites, and
elsewhere as well, the stone slab-outlined hearth is quite
common, strongly suggesting that numbers of these terraces and
flats once carried some form of housing.   The objectives,
therefore, of a set of excavations involving a series of open
settlements could be reasonably clearly formulated.  
    Site surveys at Pouerua, both preliminary (Phillips
1980) and at a much more intensive level (Leatherby and Morgan
n.d.), identify the open settlement as the predominate
habitation component integrated into and closely associated
with an extensive system of structural features related to
gardening activities.   Moreover, sites in this category
exhibit sufficient internal variability to indicate that any
useful sample excavation of them would have to extend from an
examination of some of the simplest types through to several
of the more complex examples, and in each case would have to
involve exposures of large excavation areas.   Concentration
would also have to be on those areas of each site likely to
yield evidence of housing, although other associated features
should be at least minimally investigated too.   As observed
by Green (1984) for most settlement pattern studies in
Polynesia, the concern has usually been with the structural
feature to structural feature and site to site type of
analysis.   Only occasionally has there been consideration
of the portable artefact to artefact and portable artefact to
structural feature or their within feature and site
distribution.   Thus studies such as Prickett 's (1979) of
the various portable artefact classes differentially
distributed within a house are rare in Polynesia and more are
badly needed if the functional interpretations of dwellings,
for example, are to develop.   It is also from such analyses
that the distinctions between temporary and more permanent
types of housing, and of those for special purposes, are
likely to be detected and sustained.   This means then that
a close three-dimensional recording and plotting of not just
the individual structural elements but also the portable
artefacts in and around them must be employed as part of the
excavation strategy.  
    The need therefore was to conduct a set of excavations
on open settlements at Pouerua which revealed in some measure
the range in the types of residential and related structures
plus portable artefacts found within them.   Our knowledge
in New Zealand archaeology of open settlements and their
internal organisation depended too heavily on a limited set of
individual sites from a widely spaced range of localities
scattered over various points in the prehistoric sequence and
often divorced in large part from the broader archaeological
landscape in which they were once set.   What was required
was data, especially on dwellings, from a number of such open
settlements in one locality and for one period of New Zealand
prehistory, embedded in a more or less intact archaeological
landscape with all its other elements.   This would allow us
to develop more fully an interpretation of the late
prehistoric kainga.   The excavation in five such sites at
Pouerua fills that objective.   It is those investigations
which are reported in this volume.      
  

        FROM BAY OF ISLANDS TO ADMIRALTY
BAY    
      6 December 1769-31 March 1770    
    After leaving the Bay of Islands on 5 December, the
  Endeavour   sailed north in difficult offshore winds
past the Cavalli Islands, where several canoes came out to
trade, soon leaving them behind as the ship picked up a
southerly breeze.   On 9 December they sighted Tokerau,
  'a deep Bay'      1     that Cook
named Doubtless.   Later that morning, as the ship lay
becalmed off the Karikari Peninsula, five canoes came out but
kept at a safe distance.   After these canoes returned to
land six more canoes visited the ship, whose crews told the
Europeans that they had heard of their guns and traded them
quantities of various fish and garments.   Tupaia asked
these people about their country:
    They told him that at the distance of
three days rowing in their canoes, at a place called
Moorewhennua [Muriwhenua], the land would take a short turn to
the southward and from thence extend no more to the West.
  This place we concluded must be Cape Maria Van Diemen, and
finding these people so intelligent desird him to enquire if
they knew of any Countries besides this or ever went to any.
  They said no but that their ancestors had told them to the
NW by N or NNW was a large countrey to which some people had
saild in a very large canoe, which passage took them up to a
month: from this expedition a part only returnd who told their
countreymen that they had seen a countrey where the people
eat hogs, for which animal they usd the same name (Booah) as
is usd in the Islands.   And have you no hoggs among you?
said Tupia.   - No.   - And did your ancestors bring none
back with them?   - No.   - You must be a parcel of Liars
then, said he, and your story a great lye for your ancestors
would never have been such fools as to come back without them.
  Thus much as a specimen of Indian reasoning.   After
much conversation our freinds left us but promisd to return at
night and bring with them fish, which they did and sold it
very reasonably.      2        
    This story of a canoe voyage to a large country
north-northwest of Muriwhenua, where the people had
  'booah'  , or pigs, is intriguing, because the
only
  caption    map  
large island in that direction is New Caledonia.   Pigs were
evidently not introduced there until Cook 's visit in 1774,
however,    3     although there were pigs (boa)
in Vanuatu at this time.   Tupaia was openly sceptical of
this story, and in his dismissal of the local people
exhibited a Polynesian chauvinism that was to become
increasingly evident during the rest of the voyage.    
    The next morning the   Endeavour   sailed past
the entrance of Rangaunu Bay, northwards to Houhora Harbour.
  At the entrance to Houhora was a high hill that they named
Mount Camel.   As the ship was abreast of Mount Camel a
large fire was seen on the Karikari Peninsula, and Cook
described the landscape as follows:
      No Country upon Earth can looke
more barren than the land about this Bay doth, it is in
general low except the mountain just mentioned and the Soil to
all appearence nothing but white sand thrown up in low
irregular hills lying in narrow ridges parallel with the Shore
...   The first ridge behind the sea beach is partly cover 'd
with shrubs Plants &amp;c but the second ridge hath hardly any
green thing upon it which induced me to think that it lies
open to the western Sea.   As barren as this land appears it
is not without inhabitants, we saw a Village on the side of
Mount Camel [according to Wilkinson,    'several
Hipas'  ] and a nother on the Eastern side [Karikari]
besides five Canoes that were pulling off to the ship but did
not come up with
us.        4        
    During the next few days the   Endeavour  
tacked on and off the coast in unfavourable winds, leading
Banks to comment that     'we turnd all day without
loosing anything, much to the credit of our old Collier, who
we never fail to praise if she turns as well as
this'    .    5       On 14 December
they sighted land, which Cook thought must be the northern end
of the country, for the ship was rolling in huge westerly
swells.   On 16 December, as the   Endeavour   was
driven out to sea by the westerlies, the   St Jean
Baptiste,   a French ship that was also on a voyage of
discovery, was blown in the opposite direction around North
Cape.   By an extraordinary coincidence, the first two
European ships to visit New Zealand since the mid-seventeenth
century sailed past each other in a gale, unaware of each
other 's presence.  
    Two days later the   Endeavour   approached
Murimotu (the island off North Cape), where some people were
sighted and a paa that Banks thought was surrounded by a
mud wall.   On 24 December Manawataawhi (the Three Kings
Islands) came into view.   The wind had died down so Banks
went out in a row-boat to shoot gannets, which they ate the
next day as a Yuletide   'goose pie'  .
      25 Christmas Day.   Our Goose
pye was eat with great approbation and in the Evening all
hands were as Drunk as our forefathers usd to be upon the like
occasion.        6        
    The   Endeavour   finally turned south on 1
January 1770.   During the next two weeks the ship cruised
the west coast of the North Island, keeping a respectful
distance from the land.   Near Taranaki mountain (whose name
Molyneux recorded as   'Ohacabeetee'  , Parkinson
as   'Whakapeete'   - maybe a confusion with
Kaapiti Island - and which Cook named Mount Egmont), they
sighted a few houses and a fire, but otherwise no signs of
life were seen.   On 14 January the ship sailed past
Tasman 's 'Murderers Bay', sighting a fire on a small island in
Admiralty Bay, and on 15 January the   Endeavour  
entered Totara-nui (Queen Charlotte Sound) for its last
and longest stay in any New Zealand harbour.  
    TOTARA-NUI (QUEEN CHARLOTTE SOUND)  
      15 January-6 February 1770    
    Totara-nui was a maze of deep bays, inlets and islands
carved out of the north  -  eastern end of the South
Island.   Its waterways wandered far inland amongst steep
hills and headlands, which in 1770 were covered with a rain
forest of podocarps and hardwoods, although the wind-blown
hills around the outer sound were quite barren.   Kereruu
(wood pigeons), kaakaa (parrots), parakeets, weka, tui and
bellbirds lived in the bush, where kiekie and mamaku
(tree-fern with its edible root) and tawa, titoki and miro
trees, supplejack and fuchsia (with their edible berries) grew
in abundance.   The landscape was rugged and
magnificent, with high hillsides covered in fern above the
treeline, alternating with sheltered valleys and gullies
where root crops had once been grown.    7    
  Groves of karaka and ngaio grew along the coast with
thickets of maanuka on the promontories, and flocks of
seabirds including oystercatchers, herons, shags, petrels,
dottrels and little blue penguins wheeled or waddled about the
rocky shoreline.    8      
    Totara-nui 's wealth, however, came from the water,
with its coastal beds of cockles, mussels, oysters, scallops,
and in some places paaua and crayfish, and inexhaustible
supplies of fish, including flounder, mackerel, kahawai,
haapuku, barracouta and shark.    9       The
creeks that ran down the hills had inanga (whitebait), eels
and freshwater crayfish, and fishing of various kinds was the
main industry in this water-bound place.  
    Totara-nui had a complex and ancient history, for it
had long been a staging point in migrations from the North to
the South Island.   The safest and quickest passage across
Raukawa-moana (Cook Strait) was the sea-path from Owhariu at
the southern end of the North Island to Arapaoa (now Arapawa
Island) at the entrance to the Sounds, using Ngaa Whatu (the
eyes - the Brothers Islands) as a guide.   According to
tribal accounts, Ngaa Whatu, placed there by Kupe, were so
tapu that only a tohunga or a very high-born person could look
at them, and the eyes of the paddlers had to be covered with
karaka leaves as they made the crossing, guided by a tapu
steersman.    10      
    South Island traditions speak of a number of ancestral
canoes, including   Takitimu, Te Waka-o-Aoraki, Te
Waka-huruhuru-manu, Arai-te-uru  , and   Uruao  
(which was brought by the ancestor Raakaihautuu, who dug many
of the South Island lakes with his digging stick).
  Raakaihautuu 's people were the Waitaha, an
industrious, peaceful folk who were said to have brought
kauru (cabbage trees), aruhe (fernroot) and mamaku with them,
as well as many species of birds.    11    
  They were expert in sacred matters, and most of the South
Island rock drawings, executed in a black paint made of the
soot of monoao wood, rautawhiri berry juice and weka oil, were
attributed to them by later tribes.    12    
  Another ancient people were the Rapuwai, big clumsy men
said to be up to eight feet tall, who were sometimes thought
to have come with
    Rakaihautuu    Raakaihautuu     on the
  Uruao   canoe.    13       This canoe
is reported to have visited the Sounds, then called Te Tauihu
o te Waka (the prow of the canoe) after one ancient
description of the South Island - Te Waka-o-Aoraki (the canoe
of Aoraki).    14      
    Kupe also came to the Sounds, chasing a giant octopus
all the way from Hawaiki, and this visit was remembered in
many local place-names - Arapaoa, after the downward path of
his whalebone weapon as he hit the creature 's head&semi; Whekenui
(big octopus), the bay in Tory Channel where it was killed&semi;
Ngaa Whatu-kai-ponu, where the octopus 's eyeballs were placed
as a witness to Kupe 's deed&semi; Kura-te-Au (Tory Channel), where
the current ran red with the octopus 's blood&semi; Te Mimi-o-kupe
(Kupe 's urinating), a spring on Wedge Point in Totara-nui&semi; and
many other names.    15      
  map    caption  
    Successive waves of migrants from the North Island -
Ngaati Mamoe, Ngaati Tuumatakokiri, Ngai Tara-pounamu, the
Ngaati Kurii of Ngai Tahu, Ngaati Kuia and Ngaati Apa moved
through the Sounds, each leaving groups of descendants behind
them.   By 1769, according to some accounts, Totara-nui was
dominated by the latest arrivals, a party of
Rangitaane    16     led by Te Rerewa, who had
exchanged his lands around Lake Wairarapa for a fleet of seven
canoes in which to make the migration across Raukawa-moana.
  Like all of the previous northern migrants apart from
Ngaati Kurii, Rangitaane traced their ancestry from the
  Kura-haupo   canoe    17     and Te
Rerewa also had close kinship links with Ngai
Tara-pounamu.   These kinship ties and a network of
intermarriages among the previous occupants of the area may
explain why at the time of the   Endeavour   's arrival,
each of the tribes mentioned above evidently still had
settlements in the various inlets and bays of the Sounds, and
according to an early Ngaati Kuia source, Ngaati Apa occupied
the outer reaches of Totara-nui.    18      
    As the   Endeavour   sailed into Totara-nui on
the morning of 15 January 1770, a current swept her towards
some rocks at the north-west entrance.   The boats were
lowered and towed the ship clear, watched by a male sea lion
that had surfaced nearby.   According to Banks:
      the land on both sides appeard
most miserably barren till we got pretty deep in when it began
to mend by gradual degrees.   Here we saw some canoes who
instead of coming towards us went to an Indian town or fort
built upon an Island nearly in the middle of the passage,
which appeard crowded with people as if they had flockd to it
from all parts&semi; as the ship aproachd it they wavd to us as if
to invite us to come to them but the moment we had passd by
they set up a loud shout and every man brandishd his weapons
which none of them were without.   The countrey about us was
now very fertile to appearance and well wooded so we came to
an anchor about long cannon shot from the fort, from whence 4
Canoes were immediately dispatched to reconoitre I suppose
and in case they were able to take us, as they were all well
armd.   The men in these boats were dressd much as they are
represented in Tasmans figure, that is 2 corners of the
cloth they wore were passd over their shoulders and fastned to
the rest of it just below their breast, but few or none had
feathers in their hair.   They rowd round and round the ship
defying and threatning us as usual and at last hove some
stones aboard which we all expected to be a prelude of some
behaviour which would oblige us to fire upon them&semi; but just at
this time a very old man in one of the boats express 'd a
desire of coming on board, which we immediately encouraged,
and threw a rope into his canoe by which she was immediately
hawld up along side and the old man (contrary to the opinion
of all the other Indians who went so far as to hold him fast
for some time) came on board, where he was received in as
freindly a manner as we possibly could and had many presents
given to him, with which he returnd to the canoes who
immediately joined in a war dance - whether to show their
friendship or enmity it is impossible to say, we have so often
seen them do it on both those
occasions.        19        
    The local people had congregated at a paa on the
southern end of Motuara Island, with sentinels posted at
  'the point of the bay'      20    
(possibly Cape Jackson), for Magra reported that an armed
watchman at that location was twice relieved as the
  Endeavour   sailed into the Sound.   He added that
as the ship passed Motuara,     'an old Indian, in a
singular kind of habit, came down to the waterside, attended
by several of his countrymen, and there performed some
mysterious rites, with a matt and feathers,
&amp;c'        21     - no doubt a tohunga
who was carrying out rituals in an attempt to avert harm from
these extraordinary visitors.   The four canoes that had
been sent from the paa had about sixty-five warriors on board,
and the courageous old man who boarded the vessel (later
identified by Banks as 'Topaa', or 'Topea' in the Banks
vocabulary    22    ) must have been an
important elder, for Magra said that he was
  'apparently of some distinction among them'  .
  As he came on board Tupaia greeted him with a hongi.
  His companions in the canoes laughed uproariously and then
eagerly boarded the vessel
themselves.    23      
    Later that afternoon the local people returned to
Motuara while the   Endeavour   's men collected wood and
water at Meretoto (which Cook named Ship Cove), shot numerous
shags, gathered mussels and other shellfish and made a huge
haul of 300 pounds of fish in the ship 's seine.   Parkinson
commented that some of these fish weighed up to twenty-one
pounds each, and he later listed the fish that they caught in
the Sounds as cuttlefish (probably octopus)&semi; large bream
(probably snapper) some of which weighed twelve pounds and
tasted like fine salmon&semi; small gray   'breams'  
(probably tarakihi)&semi; small and large barracouta (makaa)&semi;
flying gurnards (kumukumu)&semi; horse mackerel&semi; dogfish (pioke)&semi;
soles and dabs (flatfish of various kinds)&semi; mullet&semi; drums
(sciaenidae)&semi; scorpaenas, or rockfish (scorpionfish)&semi; colefish
(blue cod - raawaru)&semi; and   'the beautiful fish called
chimera'  
(elephant  -  fish).    24      
    Despite this splendid variety of sealife, Banks and
Solander were disappointed with Meretoto, for they found only
two new species of plants there.   Cook, on the other hand,
was delighted with the place, for it had a fine stream of
excellent water, and     'as to Wood the land here is
one intire forest'    .    25      
    At daybreak on the morning of 16 January, three canoes
brought about 100 people (including women) from the paa to the
  Endeavour  .   Banks commented that the presence of
women was   'a sign tho not a sure one of peacable
inclinations'  ,    26     which suggests
that women had been among some of the groups that had
previously confronted the   Endeavour.   The ship
had been careened for scrubbing, and when the longboat put off
with a load of casks these people tried to follow it in their
canoes.   A musket loaded with smallshot was fired at them,
whereupon they immediately returned to the vessel.   They
now offered    'stinking fish'   (probably dried
shark) in exchange for European goods, and traded peacefully
until two men were barred from coming on board by the master.
  They threatened him with their spears and were physically
forced back into their canoes.   Shortly after this another
man tried to snatch some goods from the deputy purser, and
then threatened him with his patu.   As soon as Cook saw
this he fired a musket loaded with duckshot, wounding the man
in the knee and on the foot.   According to Magra:
      His wounds producing a plentiful
hemorrhage, [the warrior] bathed them in salt water, and the
pain being acute, he angrily threw the fish which he had sold,
and for which he had been paid, into the sea.   The Indians
who were in the other canoes, did not appear surprized either
at the report of the gun or the wounds it had made, though
they all paddled round and examined them&semi; nor did the wounded
Indian retire, but wrapping himself up in mats he continued
about the ship several
hours.        27        
    After this the people paddled about the ship for a
time, eventually approaching the stern, where they talked
with Tupaia   'about their antiquity and legends of
their ancestors'  .    28       They
apparently told him that they had never either seen or heard
of a ship such as the   Endeavour   visiting their
coastline before.   This is not surprising, since these were
probably quite recent migrants to the area who were unlikely
to have heard of Tasman 's encounters with Ngaati Tumatakokiri
over a century before.   Some of this group, both men and
women, wore headdresses made of bundles of black feathers that
had been rounded and tied to the top of their heads, a dress
item the Europeans had not seen before and which Parkinson
depicted in a number of sketches.    29    
  These head-dresses have sometimes since been described as
   'mourning hats'  , although similar feather
head-dresses were also worn in historic times as a mark of
high rank.  
    That afternoon Cook, Banks, Tupaia and others went
into the pinnace to a cove about a mile to the north, where
they saw a woman 's body (which at first they mistook for a
seal) floating in the water.   They rowed past it to the
shore, and as they landed all but one member of a small family
group that had been cooking on the beach ran off into the
woods.   After a while these people returned, except for an
old man and a child, who stayed in sight amongst the outermost
trees.   The Europeans examined an earth oven on the beach,
which later proved to contain a dog 's carcass, and a large
number of food baskets nearby.   In one of these they saw
two bones that had been almost picked clean, which on closer
inspection seemed to be bones from a human forearm.   Cook
traded for one of these bones, and in consternation asked the
family members if they were not dog bones.   In answer one
of them took hold of the flesh of his own forearm and
pretended to chew it.   As Banks later commented:
      Tho we had from the first of our
arrival upon the coast constantly heard the Indians
acknowledge the custom of eating their enemies we had never
before had a proof of it, but this amounted almost to
demonstration: the bones were clearly human, upon them were
evident marks of their having been dressd on the fire, the
meat was not intirely pickd off from them and on the grisly
ends which were gnawd were evident marks of teeth, and these
were accidentaly found in a provision basket.   On asking
the people what bones are these? they answerd, The bones of a
man.   - And have you eat the flesh?   - Yes.   - Have
you none of it left?   - No.   - Why did you not eat the
woman who we saw today in the water?   - She was our
relation.   - Who then is it that you do eat?   - Those
who are killd in war.   - And who was the man whose bones
these are?   - 5 days ago a boat of our enemies came into
this bay and of them we killd 7,    30     of
whoom the owner of these bones was one.   - The horrour that
apeard in the countenances of the seamen on hearing this
discourse which was immediately translated for the good of the
company [perhaps by Tupaia or by Parkinson, who later wrote a
vocabulary of words from Queen Charlotte] is better conceivd
than describd.   For ourselves and myself in particular we
were before too well convincd of the existence of such a
custom to be surprizd, tho we were pleasd at having so strong
a proof of a custom which human nature holds in too great
abhorrence to give easy credit
to.        31        
      Banks as a natural scientist was gratified to have
proof of the practice of cannibalism, but the seamen were
horror-struck to find that the old seafaring tales of
'anthropophagi' (people-eaters) at the edges of the known
world were true.   Superstition was rife amongst sailors,
and fears of witches (who were thought to eat human flesh)
were still commonplace.   Even the better-educated officers
became obsessed with cannibalism during their stay in the
Sounds, and often wrote about the custom in their journals.
  Wilkinson commented,   'These Poor Wretches are at
war even with their Next Dore Nabours,'   and
Pickersgill wrote:
    we saw one of the Bodys and two arms
with flesh upon them which we saw them eat this is the first
Proof Possitive we have had of the Inhabitants being CANIBALS
and I belive these are the only People who kill their fellow
creatuers Puerly for the meat which we are well Assured they
do by their laying in wait one for another as a sportsman
would for his game and they carry this detestable crime so far
as to glory in carrieing in their ears the Thumbs of those
unhappy sufferrs who fell in their
way.      32        
    Magra, on the other hand, seemed delighted to be able
to contradict those armchair philosophers in Europe who denied
that the custom had ever existed.   He also made it clear
that local people were far from apologetic about the practice:
    Perhaps they thought, like a
celebrated philosopher, that it was as well to feed on the
bodies of their enemies, (for by their own accounts they eat
no other) as to leave them to be devoured by crows.   It is
however certain that they had no belief of any turpitude in
this practice, because they were not ashamed of it&semi; but, on
the contrary, when we took up an arm for examination, they
imagined us to be desirous of the same kind of food, and with
great good nature promised that they would the next day spare
a human head ready roasted, if we would come or send to fetch
it.   Some gentlemen, who never left their own homes, have
ventured, on the strength of speculative reasoning, to
question the veracity of those travellers who have
published accounts of cannibals in Africa and America&semi;
treating as falsehoods every relation, which, from their
ignorance of human nature, appears to them improbable: but
let them not indulge the same freedom on this occasion&semi; the
fact will be too well attested to be rendered doubtful by
their visionary impertinent
objections.      33        
    Banks added that the floating corpse of the woman they
had seen had been sunk in the sea with a stone by her
relatives, a custom of the Sounds, but it had somehow got
loose and floated back to the surface, where it was claimed by
her 'brother' the next day.   Not surprisingly, perhaps, the
cove where these observations were made was named
'Canibals Cove', and the sailors called the Sound 'Cannible
Harbour'.  
    Early the next morning Banks was woken by a marvellous
carillon of bird  -  song from the land:
    This morn I was awakd by the singing
of the birds ashore from whence we are distant not a quarter
of a mile, the numbers of them were certainly very great who
seemd to strain their throats with emulation perhaps&semi; their
voices were certainly the most melodious wild musick I have
ever heard, almost imitating small bells but with the most
tuneable silver sound imaginable to which maybe the distance
was no small addition.   On enquiring of our people I was
told that they have observd them ever since we have been here,
and that they begin to sing at about 1 or 2 in the morn and
continue until sunrise, after which they are silent all day
like our
nightingales.      34      
  
    After this avian concert a small canoe came out from
Motuara to visit the ship, carrying among others Topaa and a
woman whose husband had been recently killed and eaten at a
place to the east (presumably somewhere on Arapaoa Island).
  Her arms, thighs and legs were scarified in mourning.
  The conversation turned to the topic of cannibalism,
and one of the men on this canoe traded Banks a human forearm
bone, biting and chewing on it   'in such a manner as
plainly shew 'd that the flesh to them was a dainty
bit'  .    31       Tupaia again
interrogated these people about the custom:  
        But where are the sculls, sayd Tupia,
do you eat them?
  Bring them and we shall then be convinced that these are
men whose bones we have seen.   - We do not eat the heads,
answerd the old man who had first come on board the ship, but
we do the brains and tomorrow I will bring one and shew you.
  - Much of this kind of conversation passd after which the
old man went home.      36        
    This group also told the Europeans that they were
expecting an imminent attack   'over the hills'  
(probably from Port Gore) by the relatives of the canoeload of
people that they had killed.   This suggests that they had
congregated in the paa on Motuara and posted sentries for that
reason, and not because of the   Endeavour   's
arrival.  
    Most of the sailors were kept very busy during their
stay at Totara-nui, scrubbing the ship on both sides and
treating the timbers with a    'mixture of Tallow and
Venetian red'   (an interesting parallel with the Maori
practice of painting their war canoes with mixtures of oil and
red ochre), caulking with oakum and tarring any gaps,
repairing the casks, ironwork and rigging, collecting wood,
water and green vegetables, drying out the powder and baking
the ship 's biscuits to kill the innumerable weevils that
infested them.      
  

      5  
      While the French were at Sea    
      A  ll the planning had at last led to
positive action: the   Aube   and the   Comte de
Paris   were on their way to New Zealand to lay the
foundations of a French colony.   But while they were at
sea, publication of their plans led to the arousal of
patriotic passions on both sides of the Channel and, at the
same time, quite independent visits of French and British
warships to Akaroa revealed some of the realities of the
situation into which the French colonists were heading.  
    The visiting French naval captain, Dumont d'Urville,
judged that Akaroa was not a suitable site for a settlement,
but this opinion came too late to influence the plans of the
French Government and the Nanto-Bordelaise Company.   The
visit of the British warship was crucial, for it was there as
part of Hobson 's plan to waste no time in extending British
sovereignty to the South Island as well as the North.   What
is more, Lavaud made a decision while at sea to go against his
written instructions, and this resulted in the British
authorities in New Zealand becoming aware of French
intentions.  
    Lavaud 's pessimism about the outcome of the French
colonising voyage to New Zealand was matched by a prediction
in a British newspaper:   'Our neighbours will be a day
late for the fair'  .   There had been numerous
rumours in Britain about French plots   'to foil the
plans of England'   and British newspapers noted that
Hobson 's departure for New Zealand caused French newspapers to
call for French Government action to protect French commercial
interests.   But the Nanto-Bordelaise Company had been
successful in keeping its plans secret until the
  Aube   and the   Comte de Paris   were almost
ready to sail.   There is no reference to the company in the
Foreign Office files prior to February 1840.   And there was
certainly nothing to match the minor flurry caused in 1838 and
1839 by Baron Thierry and by the arrival of French Catholic
missionaries in New Zealand.  
    But then, on 15 February 1840, the   Journal du
Havre   published an account of the Nanto-Bordelaise
Company 's project which mentioned the French Government 's
intention to set up a penal colony.   This article was
reprinted in a number of British papers a few days later, and
the London-based New Zealand Company made sure that the
British Government received a copy.   The   Journal du
Havre   published another more substantial item on the
French plans to colonise New Zealand on 26 February, which was
also sent to the Foreign
Office.    1        
    The reaction of the British press was a mixture of
outrage at France 's plans for a penal colony, anxiety about
their possible success and confidence that Britain had prior
rights to New Zealand.   Deported French prisoners would be
free on British land, wrote the   New Zealand Journal  
magnanimously, and French settlers should be encouraged to
become British citizens and use their expertise to grow
grapes, olives and mulberries.   The small scale of the
French venture made the British feel that it was not a great
threat to their interests, for the New Zealand Company had
already sent out a much larger contingent of emigrants and,
although news of Hobson 's arrival in New Zealand had not yet
got back to London, it was thought likely that he had probably
already annexed New Zealand in the name of the British
Government.   Nevertheless, arguments in favour of British
rights to sovereignty over New Zealand were rehearsed and the
possible presence of a French convict settlement on British
soil near British settlers keenly
criticised.    2      
    In response to a request from the Foreign Office, the
British consuls at Le Havre and Bordeaux kept the British
Government accurately informed about the French colonising
project, but only after the matter had come out into the open
in the press.    3       According to the
British press in general and the New Zealand Company in
particular, it was the British Government 's policies on New
Zealand which had allowed the French to think that they could
seize the South Island.   Although New Zealand lay within
the British sphere of influence and was assumed by the British
to be theirs if they wanted it, its precise legal status was
very uncertain in the late 1830s.  
    Caught between the commercial interests of the
colonising lobby led by the New Zealand Company and the
missionary lobby that, notably in   The Times,  
expressed strong opposition to the corrupting influence of
European colonisation upon native peoples, the British
Government took the view in 1839 that New Zealand was an
independent country, not a British colony.   Under pressure
from the New Zealand Company, it finally agreed with great
reluctance to send Hobson to New Zealand to obtain formal
cession of sovereignty from the Maori to the British Crown in
the professed hope of thereby protecting the Maori, through
the imposition of British law, from the excesses of
Europeans.  
    However, this action publicised the fact that Britain
did not regard New Zealand as already hers.   Any other
European power was therefore free to annex New Zealand if it
could get there first and negotiate a treaty of cession with
the Maori people.   The publication of Hobson 's instructions
from the British Government, along with a Treasury minute
authorising expenditure on his voyage, was seen by the New
Zealand Company as the trigger that set off the French
colonising scheme:
      Then came the Treasury minute which
brought into question the fact of sovereignty, which no
Englishman ever before questioned.   In reference to which
foreign countries, jealous of our proceedings in regard to
colonisation, had refrained from taking any particular steps.
  Instantly a company was formed in France based on this
partial repudiation of the British rights of
sovereignty.      
  This argument had already been advanced in general terms
by the New Zealand Company and is supported by a later French
Naval Ministry document, but not by French documents that were
contemporary with the publication of Hobson 's
instructions.    4      
    In fact, as we have seen, French plans were well under
way by the time they received a copy of Hobson 's instructions
in late October 1839 and were following a momentum of their
own.   The French Foreign Affairs Ministry had noted the
British Government 's views on the independence of New Zealand
as early as June 1838.   And when the Chambers of Commerce
of Le Havre, Nantes and Dunkirk reacted to the publication of
Hobson 's instructions by asking the French Government to take
possession of part of the New Zealand coast, the Foreign
Affairs Minister was able to reply that their idea had been
anticipated and that action had already been taken to achieve
this.    5      
    With or without the Treasury minute, the French
Government regarded the North Island as effectively British
and the South Island as Maori.   The effect on the French of
their knowledge of Hobson 's instructions was probably to make
the Government more cautious about offending Britain and to
inhibit international bankers like the Rothschilds from
putting a lot of capital into a risky venture.   That is,
although it reinforced the French sense of urgency, it ensured
that their colonising in New Zealand was on a small
experimental scale.   Even so, public pressure led Lord John
Russell, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, to publish
his official correspondence on the subject and newspapers
reprinted it in serial form: April 1840 was New Zealand month
for the British press.    6      
    British reaction to the news of the departure of the
French colonists also led to public meetings of protest.
  In particular, a public meeting was held at the Guildhall
in London on 15 April.   Its aim was to petition the Queen
and both Houses of Parliament to uphold British sovereignty in
New Zealand   'at present endangered by foreign
pretensions'  , to establish the rule of law there and
to promote the most beneficial form of colonisation.   The
third aim would not be achieved by the French, who had gone to
New Zealand,   'not to co-operate in our beneficent
views, but for the purpose of establishing a penal
colony'  .   So that,   'even if France really
possessed any right of colonisation, your petitioners would
deprecate in the strongest terms her proposed establishment of
a penal colony, it being evidently impossible that convict
discipline can be maintained in the immediate vicinity of
native tribes and British
settlements'  .    7       Copies of the
petition were soon circulating in France, where Adolphe
Balguerie lamented that all his British business connections
had signed it.    8      
    A month later, a meeting of merchants, bankers,
manufacturers and shipowners in Glasgow petitioned the Queen
and the Houses of Parliament in the same manner.   Again
they requested that measures be taken to prevent colonisation
of New Zealand by the French and to impose British law.
  Again they objected in particular to French plans for a
convict settlement:       'Were we tamely to allow
that beautiful island to become the dunghill of France?...
  English blackguards were bad enough - and so were Scotch,
and even Highlanders were bad&semi; but French were the worst of
all&semi; and to send them to that country was not to be
endured.'        9      
    The pressures exerted on the British Government by the
New Zealand Company through these meetings, through the press
and through individual lobbying were unnecessary, for Hobson,
on the instructions of the British Government, was already
busy determining the fate of New Zealand.   Even so, the
Foreign Office instructed the British Ambassador in Paris to
ascertain whether it was the French Government 's intention to
form a penal settlement in New
Zealand.    10       This action was prompted
in the first instance by a report from the British Consul in
Teneriffe, who announced that the   Comte de Paris   had
arrived at the island of Palma on its way to New Zealand and
Australia, where it was intending to form a settlement.
  But the argument advanced by the Foreign Office about the
problems associated with the coexistence of British settlers
and French colonists was the same as that voiced by the New
Zealand Company and its supporters.  
    The Guildhall petition was placed before a select
Parliamentary committee on New Zealand in July.   In the
discussion that took place, a distinction was made between
British rights of sovereignty over the South Island and the
North Island.   The independence of New Zealand was seen as
referring to the North Island only, for it was North Island
chiefs that had petitioned William IV in 1831 for his
protection against the French and who had formed a
confederation of tribes in 1835, whose independence was
recognised by the British Government.   The North Island had
a substantial number of Maori inhabitants, whose consent to
British rule had to be obtained.   The South Island, on the
other hand, was seen as virtually uninhabited, making a treaty
of cession far less meaningful there.   This distinction was
made clear to Hobson in an official despatch from Lord
Normanby, who was told that, in such a case, British
sovereignty should be asserted on the ground of
discovery.    11      
    The   Comte de Paris  , meanwhile, was
continuing its eventful voyage to New Zealand - and not to
Australia.   It was a ship of 550 tons, built as a military
transport ship in the shipyards of Bayonne between 1831 and
1835.   In preparation for the voyage, its keel had been
plated with copper and bronze.   Its overall length was
forty metres and its main mast was 22.5 metres
high.    12       Including both colonists and
crew, there were some ninety people on board.   It carried
so much cargo that some of it was lashed to the deck and
risked getting in the way of crew manoeuvres, according to
Langlois.   This was its first voyage under its own sail and
Captain Langlois was far from happy with its performance.
  Almost immediately there were problems with its steering.
  The island of Palma was sighted on 2 April, and it was
decided to have the rudder looked at there.   This was done
and the opportunity taken to buy fresh food.   The rudder
was declared to be in good order, but when the ship returned
to sea steering remained a serious problem, putting excessive
strain on the masts and sails.  
    Palma was the   Comte de Paris   's last port of
call before reaching New Zealand.   It will be noted that
the ship did not call at St Helena where, according to one
version of the story, it was supposed to have picked up willow
cuttings from Napoleon 's tomb.   The origin of the Akaroa
willows was probably rather less romantic.   Cuttings from
the St Helena willow, usually known as   Salix
napoleona  , were very popular at the time and could be
found everywhere in Europe and America.   In August 1842 the
Superintendent of the Sydney Botanical Gardens even sent
  Salix Bonapartea   cuttings to
Wellington.    13       So there was no
need to call at St Helena to obtain them.   By 24 April,
when a baby 's birth was registered on board the   Comte de
Paris  , it was in the South Atlantic at
30&deg;S., 25&deg;W. (Paris meridian).
  The ship sailed round the Cape of Good Hope, across the
Indian Ocean and then to the south of Australia.   Still
thinking that it was the way the rudder was installed that was
causing the steering problems, Langlois decided to effect
major changes to the way it operated.   This was done at sea
in mid-June when they must have been in the Indian Ocean.
  But this made no difference, and he concluded that it was
the overall design of the ship that was at fault.  
    During the night of the 11-12 July, when the
  Comte de Paris   was south-west of Tasmania
(45&deg;S. and 142&deg;E. of Paris) and the
sea rough and the winds very strong, lightning suddenly hit
the topmast and later in the night the foremast.   Both
times there was considerable damage, but particularly to the
foremast and its chainwales.   Despite repeated warnings
from Belligny, Langlois had not earthed the lightning
conductor fitted to the main mast, even though the ship was
carrying a great deal of gunpowder.   Langlois resented the
underhand way in which Belligny had been brought into the
colonisation venture, supposedly as a neutral scientist but in
fact as Decazes 's prot&eacute;g&eacute;, and
then given considerable authority.   The damage to the ship
was one of the more serious consequences of their inability to
get on together.  
    The South Island of New Zealand was sighted on 8
August, and the next day, unable to enter Akaroa Harbour
because of unfavourable winds, the   Comte de Paris  
entered Pigeon Bay on the north side of Banks Peninsula.
  From their departure from Rochefort on 20 March, they had
taken four and a half months to reach New Zealand.  
    During the voyage, two adult emigrants and one young
girl fell ill and died, and one baby was born.   Brocher
identified the emigrants who died as Jeantrop (an unlikely
spelling) and Girardin.   These correspond to Jotereau and
Chardin in Belligny 's much more reliable list.   Some
colonists were still suffering from Rochefort fever on their
arrival.   However, despite the length of the voyage and the
bad weather they had encountered, most of the emigrants seem
to have lived rather well and to have established good
relations with the officers and crew.   The baby born during
the voyage, Armand Isidore Libeau, was named after the ship 's
second captain, Charles Armand Isidore Desprairies, who became
its godfather.  
      In the conflicts opposing Langlois and Belligny,
the settlers were clearly on Langlois 's side.   As a
gentleman and a scholar, Belligny was the odd man out on the
voyage, although he did have the company of his cousin.
  The emigrants took full advantage of the fact that they
were being fed on the voyage at the state 's expense and Lavaud
was horrified to find how much they had managed to consume.
  Despite the fact that it was mainly the French Government
that was paying for it, the Nanto-Bordelaise Company tried to
hold Langlois personally responsible for 6630   francs'  
worth of excessive consumption of food.   A further
indication of the conviviality reigning on board the
  Comte de Paris   was that, in the course of the
voyage, venereal disease seems to have spread from the crew to
some of the colonists.  
    The   Aube   followed much the same itinerary as
the   Comte de Paris,   calling at Teneriffe, St Louis
du S&eacute;n&eacute;gal and Gor&eacute;e on the West
African coast for fresh supplies and to exchange a sick
officer for another who would be fit for the long voyage.
  From then on, once again, there were no ports of call
until the ship reached New Zealand, for both ships were in a
hurry.   Three members of the crew died during the voyage,
two from accidents, one from meningitis.   The
  Aube   rounded the Cape of Good Hope and headed
eastwards at a latitude of between 40&deg; and
45&deg;S.   It too met with bad weather to the
south of Australia, with strong winds, rain and hail.  
    Lavaud 's instructions regretted that the urgency of
his mission made it necessary for him to go straight to Akaroa
without calling at the Bay of Islands, where he could have
made contact with Bishop Pompallier and obtained the services
of missionaries with a knowledge of the Maori language.
  Despite these instructions, Lavaud decided that it would
be wiser to call first at the Bay of Islands, especially as
the south-easterly winds would have made his projected path
round the south of New Zealand more difficult.   This course
replaced an earlier intention he had during the voyage of
calling briefly at Hobart, where the missionaries could have
embarked on another ship for the Bay of
Islands.    16       He wished to give his
crew much needed rest and fresh food, to get Aimable Langlois
onto dry land as soon as possible because of the bad state of
his health, to take on new supplies before being caught up in
his duties at Akaroa, and to obtain missionaries with local
knowledge, especially as those already on board were not
getting on well together.    17      
    It was on 29 June that, having passed the longitude of
Tasmania, Lavaud set his course for the Bay of Islands.
  Given the direction of the winds, this decision did not
mean that Lavaud had lost a sense of urgency about his
mission.   However, it turned out to be a crucial decision,
one that went against his official instructions and one which
alerted the British authorities in New Zealand to French
intentions.   One can only speculate about what would have
happened if Lavaud had gone directly to the South Island and
set up the French settlement there before making contact with
the British officials in the North Island.   It would
certainly have made it more difficult for the British to
assert their rights without indulging in military
confrontation.   The Three Kings Islands were sighted on 8
July, and the   Aube   came to anchor in the Bay of
Islands during the night of 10-11 July.   Like the
  Comte de Paris  , it had taken 142 days to reach its
first New Zealand port.  
    One member of the   Aube   's crew was suffering
from scurvy by the end of the voyage, and many of them had
soft inflamed gums, but Lavaud was very satisfied with their
general state of health.   There were two doctors on board
and the crew regularly ate raw potatoes to prevent scurvy.
  One of Lavaud 's passengers, Aimable Langlois, was unwell a
lot of the time, however.   The bad weather experienced by
both ships and the sheer length of the voyage had caused the
death of nearly all the farm animals on board.   One cow
died in June, the other cow and the bull soon after the
  Aube   's arrival at the Bay of Islands.   Of all the
animals embarked on the   Aube   and the   Comte de
Paris  , only one hen, one goose and one duck survived.
  However, the care taken with seeds and plants seems to
have been better rewarded.    18      
    While the two French ships were fighting against the
elements, two French naval ships were already at Akaroa in the
course of a voyage round the world.   The
  Astrolabe  , under Captain Dumont d'Urville, entered
Akaroa Harbour on 8 April with great difficulty, followed the
next day by the other ship in his scientific expedition, the
  Z&eacute;l&eacute;e  , under Captain
Jacquinot.   Their visit had nothing whatever to do with the
projected French colonisation of the South Island.   They
had been at sea since September 1837, well before Langlois
began to seek support for his scheme.   The aims of
d'Urville 's expedition, as set out in his instructions, were
scientific and hydrographic, although he was asked to look out
for suitable localities for French whalers, especially around
Cook Strait.    19       When Sir George
Gipps, Governor of New South Wales, heard about French plans
for colonising Banks Peninsula, he reported back to London
that   'the French discovery ships   Astrolabe  
and   Z&eacute;l&eacute;e  , had been at
  Banks'   Peninsula, but made no indications of forming a
settlement there'  .    20    
  However, during the nine days they were in Akaroa,
d'Urville and his officers kept informative journals which
give some insight into what Akaroa was like just before the
French colonists arrived.  
    At Akaroa Dumont d'Urville found an American whaler,
the   Thomas Dickason  , and a French whaler, the
  Gange  , which had both called there for provisions.
  Men from the   Thomas Dickason   went ashore to
shoot pigeons, get water from streams and buy potatoes and
other fresh food.   They were able to obtain fifteen to
twenty bushels of potatoes and a quarter of beef by barter.
  Captain Robin of the   Gange   gave a Maori a
whaleboat, probably in exchange for potatoes.   William
Green, who had been left at Akaroa on 10 November 1839 with
his wife and child and an assistant to manage thirty head of
cattle and five calves for W.B. Rhodes, was very successfully
supplying the ships with butter, cheese, milk and
vegetables.    21       Some sort of commerce
was well under way by early 1840 in Akaroa between those on
shore, both Maori and European, and the visiting ships.  
    A little earlier, in 1838 and 1839, whaling ships
tended to remain in Akaroa Harbour, setting themselves up on
shore and sending their boats outside the heads in search of
whales.   In July 1838, for example, men from the
  Averick Heineken  
    lowered 4 boats pulled out of the bay to look
for whale.   There were 3 American and 3 French ships in the
same bay.   Thursday 12th one of the french ships boats got
one whale.   Friday 13th we went out and the 3rd and 4th
mates boats stayed out until Monday 16th.   We stopped to
the tents that belonged to the american ships.   About 15
miles from the ships this day.      Whales were
towed back into the harbour by the whaleboats to be cut in and
tried out.   And as the   China   was entering Akaroa
Harbour in June 1839, in company with the   Acasta   and
the   Favorite  , Captain Potter saw   'a number
of whaleboats along shore'   waiting, presumably, to
sight a whale and then race out to kill
it.    22      
    During the 1840 season, however, whaling ships seem to
have stayed in Akaroa for a fortnight rather than a month, and
to have used it more for rest and recreation, recruiting,
repairs and supplies.   The ship would be cleaned, painted,
blacked, sometimes careened.   Firewood, water and potatoes
were the most common things obtained from on shore.   But
they would also get timber for spars, rushes, pigeons, green
vegetables, mussels, meat and dairy products.   In 1839,
Hempelman was sending boatloads of potatoes from Peraki to the
whaling ships in Akaroa Harbour, but by 1840 there seemed to
be rather more potatoes grown around Akaroa Harbour
itself.  
    After resting briefly in Akaroa Harbour, whaling ships
in 1840 would go to Peraki for the serious business of bay
whaling.   This is the sort of pattern one sees in the first
half of the year in such ships as the American
  Neptune,   and the French   Ad&egrave;le,
Cosmopolite, Ernest, H&eacute;va   and
  Pauline  .    23       Access to the
sea must have been a lot easier from the smaller bay at
Peraki, although the ships were less sheltered from the stormy
south-westerly winds.   Despite this preference for working
out of Peraki, Akaroa was still visited by a number of ships
before the Nanto-Bordelaise Company 's settlers established
themselves there.   In the first seven and a bit months of
1840, it was visited by 3 men-of-war, 10 French whaling ships,
13 American whaling ships and some coastal traders.   The
seven French whaling ships working in Pegasus Bay out of the
northern bays of Banks Peninsula (Ports Cooper and Levy) seem
to have had little contact with those working out of the
southern bays (Peraki, Akaroa) up until the month of August,
when the   H&eacute;va   and the
  Pauline   moved from Peraki to Port
Cooper.    24       Visiting ships played an
important part in the local economy.   They brought people
and supplies from Sydney or the North Island to the shore
whaling stations and took   illustration  
  caption  
whale oil and bone back there on the return journey.   At
the same time, visiting whaling ships provided a market for
farm products.      

  

  NB this text is bilingual: each section is given first in
Maori, then in English  
  text in Maori    photo    caption  
        Wero (Ritual Challenge)      
    This is a ritual practice which is watched with awe
and anticipation by onlookers.   When the sentinels observe
visitors approaching the marae they sound the conch shell
(p&umacron;t&omacron;rino).   If it happens to
be a very prestigious group, the host people prepare to give
them a resounding welcome.   The first part of the ceremony
consists of sending forth three warriors to challenge the
group according to the following karakia:
      Arise and come forth
  Illustrious offspring of the gods&semi;
  Come forth illustrious ones,
  Come forth illustrious ones&semi;
  Here the token of alertness,
  Here the token of sacredness,
  Here the token of acceptance&semi;
  Reveal your excellence,
  Reveal your power,
  Reveal your sacredness.      
    The first warrior advances, then the second, and
finally the third.   When they jump, prance about and
brandish their fighting weapons with rolling eyes, grimacing
faces and protruding tongues, they engender fear in their
audience.   At this point the third warrior places a token
on the ground in front of the leader of the visiting group.
  This is to determine whether the visitors come as friend
or foe.   If they come in peace, the leader of the group
will pick up the token and the warriors will proceed to lead
the visitors onto the marae.   Simultaneously, the old women
of the marae will begin to give the call of welcome to the
visitors.  
    In the past, however, if the visitors had evil
intentions, they would send their warriors to pursue the host
warriors and to attack them.   But these days there is
little likelihood of this kind of retaliation taking place.
  All visitors come in peace and with goodwill.  
  Text in Maori    photo    caption  
        Whaik&omacron;rero (Formal
Speech-making)      
    Whaik&omacron;rero or formal speech-making is
performed by male elders on the marae and in social
gatherings.   First, there are the speeches of welcome by
the hosts and then the speeches of reply by the visitors.
  In most cases formal speech-making follows a particular
pattern in which certain elements are addressed:
  a ritual chant
acknowledgement of those who have passed on
acknowledgement of the ancestral house
acknowledgement of Mother Earth
speeches to the living
discussion of the purpose for the gathering
conclusion with a song  
  The explanations which follow give a brief summary of each
of the above elements.  
        Ritual chant or Tauparapara:  
  This is a special prayer or chant to the gods which varies
according to the purpose of the gathering.   There are, for
example, chants to dispel evil influences, to alert the
people, and to sanctify them.   But the main chants are to
invoke the protection of the gods and to honour the
visitors.  
      Acknowledgement of the deceased:  
  Regardless of the nature and purpose of a meeting or
gathering the M&amacron;ori always remember the dead.
  To them the dead are still living - grandparents, parents,
relatives, and so forth - in the spirit realm.
  Accordingly, the M&amacron;ori believe that there
is an unbroken link from the gods to past, present, and future
generations.   They say that the spirits of the deceased are
not too far away, that they are in fact still on this earth,
but obscured from the sight of man.   We are unable to see
them because they can't be seen with our physical eyes, and
therefore our eyes are blind in a spiritual sense.   The
living often invite the departed to come forward and support
the happenings of the day.  
      Acknowledgement of the ancestral house:   
  It is customary to name a tribal house after an important
ancestor who has died.   The support posts of the house also
represent important ancestors who bind the generations of the
tribe to one another.   In this part of the
whaik&omacron;rero, indication is given of the
connection between the speaker and the group he represents and
the house and ancestors of the host tribe.   Even though a
house may not be carved, these kinship relationships are still
expressed in honour of the people to whom the house belongs.
  The quality of the house is often, but not always,
indicative of the power and status of the people.  
      Acknowledgement of Mother Earth:     The
speech is then directed to Mother Earth, the mother of all
living things.   Everything that has life was conceived in
the womb of Mother Earth, including mankind.   Man was
fashioned from the earth and will ultimately return to the
earth.   This is the final consummation of man.   All
life-sustaining elements originate in Mother Earth.  
      Speeches to the living:      The main
aim of this part of the speech is to re-establish kinship ties
between the parties.   Perhaps the guiding principle here is
not to offend anyone, but to show respect and to extend a hand
of fellowship in accordance with the following commonly-used
formula:
        Glory to God in the highest,
  Peace on earth,
  Goodwill to all mankind.          
    The important thing to remember is not to offend
people by trampling on their mana, and goodwill should always
prevail.  
        The purpose of the gathering:  
  A speaker is free to vary his remarks at this stage
depending on the nature and purpose of the gathering, but
usually only a brief mention is made of the topic, and further
discussion is reserved until after the formal speech-making is
completed.  
      Song:     After a person has spoken his
group stands to support him with a song.   The purpose of
the song is to add group support to the
whaik&omacron;rero and the purpose of the gathering.
  A song is usually     choosen    chosen    
that is appropriate for the occasion, for example, a dirge for
a funeral service, or a love song for a wedding, but nowadays
there is often a mixture of songs and themes.    
    It should be remembered that while these elements will
usually be present in a whaik&omacron;rero or formal
speech, their order of delivery may be varied.  
  Text in Maori    photo    caption  
      Whakanoa (Free from tapu)    
    Whakanoa is necessary to lift or nullify a tapu.
  It is not appropriate, for example, that a person should
roam the face of the earth after birth and carry the tapu of
creation by the gods.   Shortly after birth a child is taken
to a sacred altar, and there is ritually cleansed by water so
that the tapu of birth does not remain with him or her.
  After this ceremony is completed the child is able to move
freely in the world.  
    There are many other customs and rituals associated
with the whakanoa.   For example, when a new house is opened
the tohunga will whakanoa or nullify the tapu of
T&amacron;ne (god of the forest) from whom the
materials were obtained to build the house.   In this
situation the tohunga uses a twig of the kawakawa tree and as
he performs his incantations he will sprinkle sacred water
onto the floor, walls and posts of the house.  
    In all of these situations there is both a system of
sanctification and of nullification.   Some of the tapu of
the gods is dissipated and the tapu of other gods is
established.  
    Nothing can ever be totally free of all tapu.  
  Text in Maori  
      Whakapapa (Genealogy)    
    Whakapapa is the genealogical descent of all living
things from the gods to the present time.   The meaning of
whakapapa is 'to lay one thing upon another' as, for example,
to lay one generation upon another.   Everything has a
whakapapa: birds, fish, animals, trees, and every other living
thing&semi; soil and rocks and mountains also have a whakapapa.  
    Man also has a genealogy.   Whakapapa is a basis for
the organization of knowledge in respect of the creation and
development of all things.   The word t&amacron;tai
is often used as a synonym for whakapapa.   There is a major
difference, however, in that the word t&amacron;tai
signifies the order and structure of various domains, for
example, the organization of the stars and heavenly bodies,
the organization of the forest, and the organization of the
sea and all the life within it.  
    The t&amacron;tai of human beings often refers
to the actual recital of genealogies rather than the system of
descent from one generation to another.   I have classified
the genealogy of the M&amacron;ori under the following
headings.   First, there is the cosmic genealogy which
concerns the processes of creation of the universe.
  Secondly, there is the genealogy of the gods which
discusses the creation of the gods of man and all organic life
on the earth.   Thirdly, there is the genealogy of the
precursors of man or the primal genealogy, which began with
T&amacron;nenuiarangi and Hineahuone.   Fourth, there
is the genealogy of the canoes which came here from
Hawa&imacron;ki.  
        Cosmic Genealogies:     These
genealogies describe the creation of the foundation of the
universe by Io, the Supreme God.   Iomatua is accorded the
honour of having created all things.   The first genealogies
begin with Te Kore (unorganized potential) and the universe
evolves through various aeons of time and phases of darkness
and light.   The following is a version of an early or
cosmic genealogy.  
  diagram  
      Genealogy of the Gods:     This
genealogy begins when Ranginui, the offspring of light and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, the offspring of
darkness, cohabited and brought forth a number of children.
  These are the main offspring:
T&amacron;whirim&amacron;tea, god of winds,
T&amacron;ne, god of forests, Tangaroa, god of the sea,
Rongomat&amacron;ne, god of the k&umacron;mara
and cultivated crops, Haumia, god of the fernroot and wild
herbs and berries, T&umacron;matauenga, god of war and
precursor of man, and R&umacron;aumoko, god of
earthquakes and volcanoes.   It was through the act of
separating their parents that these children became tutelary
gods of the divisions of nature and the environment.  
      Genealogy of Mortal Man or Primal
Genealogies:     When the children of Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku entered the world of
light and dwelt with their mother
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, they became ira
t&amacron;ngata or mortal beings.   Thus being under
the influence of the course of the physical world, they became
subject to illness and death.   T&amacron;nenuiarangi
was the first man to inhabit this world&semi; he married Hineahuone
(the first woman) and they begat Hinet&imacron;tama.
  T&amacron;ne also cohabited with his daughter,
Hinet&imacron;tama, and they begat children, and these
were the forerunners of all the human inhabitants of the
earth.   Later Hinet&imacron;tama discovered that she
had had an incestuous relationship with her father and she
became so ashamed that she ran off to the depths of the
underworld and there became known as the
Hinenuitep&omacron; or the goddess of death.   After
many generations many of their descendants such as
M&amacron;ui, Hema, T&amacron;whaki, Toi, Ngahue
and Kupe became famous ancestors of the M&amacron;ori,
settling the continents and subsequently the islands of
Polynesia.  
      Genealogy of the Canoes:     After
several voyages to Aotearoa, Kupe returned to the islands and
told his people of the bountiful land that lay in the southern
ocean.   Now there was some strife and war in Hawaiiki over
food resources and a sizable group of people decided that they
should migrate to Aotearoa.   After they arrived here, they
settled the whole of the country and were a prosperous people
well adapted to the new land at the time the
P&amacron;keh&amacron; arrived.   Many
M&amacron;ori people can trace their genealogies back
to the paramount chiefs of the great fleet of canoes and to
ancestors who inhabited other islands of the
Pacific.    
    It is through genealogy that kinship and economic ties
are cemented and that the mana or power of a chief is
inherited.   Whakapapa is one of the most prized forms of
knowledge and great efforts are made to preserve it.   All
the people in a community are expected to know who their
immediate ancestors are, and to pass this information on to
their children so that they too may develop pride and a sense
of belonging through understanding the roots of their
heritage.  
  photo    caption  
  Text in Maori    diagram    caption  
      Whare Whakairo (Carved Ancestral
House)    
    Although the whare whakairo was originally constructed
after the bodily form of our primeval parents, Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku, in their nuptial
embrace, it has become more popular in contemporary thinking
to regard the whare whakairo as representing important tribal
ancestors.   The main ridge pole (t&amacron;huhu),
the rafters (heke), and the barge boards (maihi) represent the
backbone, the ribcage and the outstretched arms of an
ancestor.   The tekoteko or carved figure on the front gable
of a house represents the ancestor whose name the house bears.
  However, the structure of the house symbolizes the state
in which Ranginui and
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku and their children
dwelt together in the spirit realm when conflict began to
arise.   The earthen floor of the house is
Papat&umacron;&amacron;nuku or Earth Mother, and
the posts (poupou) represent the children poised in the act of
separating their parents.  
    When M&amacron;ori people assemble on the
marae, and especially in the whare whakairo, they are, in
essence, returning to their roots and to the source of their
being.   They congregate in the bosom of the house to be
instructed on tribal matters and to be rejuvenated in spirit
by being among the spirits of their ancestors and gods.
  Many M&amacron;ori will travel from miles around on
the occasion of the death of kin or to participate in some
other hui or meeting.   When they enter the whare whakairo
they cut themselves off from the world outside and are
revitalized, returning to the outside world with a new zest
for life.  
    The doorway of the house is a significant feature of
the building.   It represents the threshold between two
states: the world of gloom within the house, and the
aom&amacron;rama outside.   The door symbolizes a
change of state as one emerges from the main body of the house
and enters the world outside.   It is the threshold
separating the sacred and the profane, and the door lintel is
often carved in motifs representing the vagina, thus
emphasizing the passage from the world of confinement into the
world of light.   The window of the house represents a
primitive archetype.   The window opening or fissure
symbolizes the opening through which the children of Rangi and
Papa perceived the light of the outside world and wanted to
possess it.   The house is sited so that it faces
north-east, towards the rising sun.   This too is symbolic
of moving from the world of confinement and suspended
animation into a world of light.   As the sun rises in the
morning its light enters the small aperture or window, just as
the children of Rangi and Papa perceived the first light from
within the bosom of their parents.  
    The idea of thresholds and changes of state is also
represented within the house in the pout&amacron;huhu
(alternatively referred to as poum&amacron;rama) and
the poutuarongo.   The pout&amacron;huhu is set at
the front of the house, on the right side of the door as one
enters.   It represents the initial upward thrust as
T&amacron;ne pushed apart Rangi and Papa, and
symbolizes the light or the pathway to the gods.   The
poutuarongo, which is situated at the extreme rear of the
house, at the end of the t&amacron;huhu or ridge pole,
represents the threshold between life and death.   This is
one of the reasons that Ng&amacron;puhi place the
coffins containing their deceased in the house at the base of
the poutuarongo.  
    The symbolism of death within the house is also
illustrated by the tradition of passing the coffin through the
window of the house rather than through the door.   It will
be recalled that the children of Rangi and Papa first saw the
light of the outside world through their mother 's armpit.
  Later on they chose to enter the outside world through the
doorway or pathway which was made by the separation of their
parents.   Therefore, the idea of entering or exiting
through the doorway is symbolic of entering death again,
rather than entering a new state of life.   The wairua of
the deceased lives on, and returns to the spirit world.
  The practice of passing the corpse through the window
signifies the freedom of the spirit to travel without
encumbrance in that sacred realm as did the gods in their
original spiritual creation.  
    In modern times, the concept of the whare whakairo has
been extended to include the 'house' or territory of the
tribe.   For example, in defining the boundaries of
Ng&amacron;puhi-nui-tonu, the t&amacron;huhu of
the territory extends from the Pout&amacron;huhu at
Tamaki to the Poutuarongo at Te Rerenga Wairua in the Far
North.   The maihi of the house extend into the boundaries
of Te Aupouri, Te Rarawa, Ng&amacron;ti Kahu,
Ng&amacron;puhi and Ng&amacron;ti
Wh&amacron;tua.   The poupou which extend to the
heavens above are the famous mountains of the Tai Tokerau,
such as Maunga Piko, Te Ramaroa, Maunga Taniwha, Te
R&amacron;kaumangamanga, Maunga Rei and Titirangi.
  The papararo or floor is called Te Hiku o te Ika a
M&amacron;ui.   When one enters these tribal
territorial boundaries one is said to enter into the sacred
house of Ng&amacron;puhi-nui-tonu, and therefore, to
come under the influence of the gods and customs belonging to
the tribal group.   One experiences a certain healing
influence or a sense of well-being when one operates within
one 's tribal boundaries.  
    And so it happens on many occasions when
M&amacron;ori visit their places of birth or
upbringing, that they experience a rejuvenation of spirit and
a     herapeutic    therapeutic     restoration of
their total health (physical, mental, and spiritual) and are
ready to face the challenges of life once more.   To return
to one 's birthplace and to participate in discussion with
elders in the presence of the ancestors and the gods is
something equivalent to the Christian practice of attending
church, where one expects to be uplifted and feel peace of
mind through worship.  
    When a new house is to be dedicated, the tohunga
gather the chips (from the carvings) and earth (from the
foundation posts) and use them in the dedicatory ceremonies.
  A handful of earth is scattered on the marae
&amacron;tea and about the house, and prayers are
offered to appease R&umacron;aumoko, god of
earthquakes.   The chips from the carvings are scattered
about in the house and the carvings, and prayers are offered
to T&amacron;ne, god of the forests.   Prayers are
also offered to other nature gods (including
T&amacron;whirim&amacron;tea, god of the winds,
storms and tempests) so that the house may stand firm against
the forces of nature.   Kawakawa leaves are used in this
ritual.  
    According to my elders, when a house was dedicated the
priests would go to the local burial ground in the early dawn
and retrieve a small portion of soil and/or a special artifact
and bring them to the house.   They would then bless the
house and place the soil or treasure by the poutokomanawa or
main post to represent the receptacle for the mauri of the
house.   The reason for this custom was to attract the mana
and sacred influence of the ancestors who had passed on into
the spirit realm.   They would also light a special fire
which represented the manawa ora or life-giving energy of the
house.   It was also a symbol of the ahik&omacron;mau
or sacred power of the gods.   In ancient times, it was only
those who were ritually prepared at the sacred altars who were
permitted to enter the whare maihi or sacred carved house.  
    Finally, the carved house is a symbol of the prestige,
power, and industriousness of a tribe.   There are many such
houses being built today, a practice which is indicative of
the renaissance going on in the M&amacron;ori world,
and the revival of many traditional cultural
practices.    
  

      Waitangi: Treaty and Tribunal    
    GARTH CANT  
    Land rights and the relationships between indigenous
peoples and later arrivals have become significant items on the
political agendas of a number of countries including New Zealand,
Australia and Canada.   In all cases legal concepts to do with
human rights and aboriginal title have cumulated to the point where
indigenous land rights can be established with or without reference
to treaties signed by the British Crown and indigenous peoples
(McHugh 1983&semi; Kawharu 1989).   In the New Zealand case we have a
treaty which spelt out the rights and obligations of the Crown and
the Maori tribes.   The Treaty of Waitangi, signed in good faith
by both parties in 1840, has become the basis for working
relationships between Crown and Maori people in the 1980s.  
    As a result of the Treaty of Waitangi, and ongoing
clarifications of its status, we are in a position to see ourselves
as two peoples, occupying the same land and depending on the same
resources, linked together by a Treaty which defines resource
relationships and provides a common citizenship.   In the 1980s
a number of people and institutions are at work sorting out the
facts and the implications of this shared resources/shared
citizenship equation.   Foremost among them are historians,
members of the Waitangi Tribunal, judges of the High Court and the
Court of Appeal and members of Government including the Minister
for the Environment (Geoffrey Palmer).   The Treaty of Waitangi
provides the basis for a bicultural partnership and the Waitangi
Tribunal is one of the key institutions charged with sorting out
the details of this partnership.  
    Claudia Orange has written a substantive history, a short
but pertinent discussion paper addressed to resource managers and
a short introductory overview (Orange 1987, 1988).   She helps me
to organise our history in this way (Figure 1).   The years about
1840 represent the context in which the Treaty had its birth and
was put in place&semi; the years round about 1975 and 1985 are those
when the Tribunal was put in place and commenced its task.   In
between, from the 1860s to the 1930s, are the years during which
  pakeha   New Zealand suffered a loss of memory with regard
to the Treaty (Orange 1988, 2).  
    The British Government had strong reasons for seeking a
Treaty in 1840.   Claudia Orange characterises these as legal,
diplomatic and political.   The legal relates to the fact that
the British had recognised Maori sovereignty in the 1830s - in
particular in March 1834 when a national flag, provided by the
British and selected from a choice of three by the Northern Chiefs,
was hoisted at Waitangi in the presence of Maori chiefs and
European observers and given a 21 gun salute by   HMS
Alligator  .   The second was diplomatic - a number of other
nations, especially the French, were showing interest in
establishing settlements in New Zealand.  
    The third set of reasons was political.   Atrocities in
Tasmania, carried out under official instruction, were widely
publicised in Britain (Ryan 1981).   As a result the Aborigines
Protection Society and the Missionary lobbies within Britain were
strongly supported by public opinion.   The British Government
was strongly motivated to establish British rule in New Zealand and
their misadventures in Australia ensured that it was done in a
negotiated manner.  
    Captain Hobson R.N. came to the Bay of Islands in 1840 with
instructions to obtain a Treaty.   The texts of the Treaty were
worked out by Hobson, British Resident Busby and Missionary
Williams and a meeting called of all the Chiefs and tribes who were
available in the North (Figure 2).   The terms of the Treaty were
explained in Maori on February 5th, debated through the night by
the Maori tribes and agreed to on February 6th when some 46
  Rangatira   signed on behalf of their   iwi   and
  hapu  .   Copies were then made and dispatched to all
parts of the country from Muriwhenua in the North to Ruapuke Island
in Foveaux Strait.  
    Most of the coastal tribes, including Ngai Tahu in the
South, signed.   Significantly there was unwillingness on the
part of a number of important inland tribes to sign - no further
signatures were obtained from Waikato, Arawa, Tuwharetoa or
Tuhoe.  
    As a result of the Treaty the British had the right to
govern   (kawanatanga),   to set up an administration and
bring in settlers.   Their administration had the right to buy
any lands which Maori wanted to sell.   (Copies of the two texts,
in English and in Maori, are available from many sources including
Orange, 1987.   For an authoritative English translation of the
Maori text see Kawharu, 1989, 319-321.)  
    On the Maori side lands, forests, fisheries, food gathering
places and other special properties   (taonga)   were
preserved.   Maori tribes were to retain full chieftainship
  (rangatiratanga)   over these properties.   In addition
Maori people were given the full rights and duties of citizenship
as the people of England.  
    The Treaty was recognised as a basis for a working
partnership between Maori and Crown and European settlement
proceeded in this context in the 1840s and 1850s.   By the 1860s
the situation changed.   Political control passed from London to
the New Zealand Assembly located first in Auckland, then in
Wellington.   Maori (along with women) were effectively excluded
from participation in Government by the franchise which was
restricted to males who owned property as individuals.   The
priorities of successive settler Governments were to assert
 'sovereignty' at the expense of   'rangatiratanga'   and
obtain large areas of land for European settlement.   These
priorities were achieved by military and legislative actions
(Belich, 1986&semi; Ward  ,   1973&semi; Orange, 1987).  
    From 1860 onwards Government recruited troops and fought
wars against Maori tribes in Taranaki, Waikato, Bay of Plenty and
Poverty Bay.   Legislation was passed to support the wars and
link them to the confiscation of Maori lands.   Each war was
fought on a cost-plus basis.   Settler militia, Maori militia and
immigrants were recruited to supplement Imperial troops in
sufficient numbers to ensure victory.   Once Government forces
won (or in the case of the campaign against Te Kooti reached a
stalemate), the costs of the war were tallied up and sufficient
land was compensated to reward the militia and meet other
expenses.  
    What the wars began, legislation completed.   Tribal
ownership of land and access to fisheries and other resources were
progressively abolished.   By the turn of the century most of the
best land had passed out of Maori hands and the economic base of
every tribe had been substantially depleted.  
    European New Zealanders, legislators and Attorneys General
suffered a loss of memory about the Treaty.   Maori did not.
  They launched petition after petition and took court action
after court action through the period (see especially Orange, 1987,
Chapter 9,   The quest for lost rights)  .  
    Recovery of pakeha awareness dates from the 1930s when a
political alliance was formed between the Ratana Party and the
Labour Party.   Since that time, change has been slow but
cumulative.   The Maori contribution during World War II, the
growth and urbanisation of the Maori population and the global
upsurge of interest in human rights have all played their part.
  figure 1  
From 1935 onwards successive Governments, Labour and National, were
strongly supportive of greater equity for Maori but expressed this
support in assimilationist and monocultural ways.  
    In the 1970s the Treaty House at Waitangi and the February
6th celebrations became a focal point for challenges to Government
policies and to monocultural values (National Council of Churches
1983).   In 1975 the Labour Government, with Norman Kirk as Prime
Minister and Matiu Rata as   Minita Maori,   passed the
  Treaty of Waitangi Tribunal Act  .   A substantial
mechanism was put in place to investigate current policies and
actions of the Crown.   What Labour began the National Party has
continued.  
    The Waitangi Tribunal established in 1975 was enlarged in
1985 and again in 1989.   It has heard a sequence of claims
beginning in Taranaki in 1983 and including Ngai Tahu in 1988 and
1989 (Figure 3).   Factual and legal insights have been
accumulating with each finding and have flowed on to other legal
and policy arenas (Sorenson, 1987).   The first two findings,
from Motunui in Taranaki and the Kaituna River in the Bay of Plenty
were concerned with water pollution and the impact of this on the
fisheries and the   mana   of the people who were the
guardians of these natural resources.   The Manukau claim was
large and wideranging&semi; it involved the guardianship of the Manukau
Harbour and the impact of urban and industrial development on the
Maori communities which lived on its shores and depended on its
resources.   Te Reo Maori was a national claim which identified
Maori language as one of the   taonga   identified in Article
2 of the Treaty.   The Waiheke Island and the Orakei findings in
1987 both identified injustices relating to loss of land by the
Ngati Paoa and the Ngati Whatua tribes in the vicinity of Auckland
City.   In 1988 the Tribunal brought down the first part of its
findings on the Muriwhenua claim in the far North and began to hear
the large and complex Ngai Tahu claim in the South Island (Evison,
1986, 1988).  
    Instead of commenting briefly on each of these major claims
I will select one of special interest in 1988 and 1989 as an
example.  
      THE MURIWHENUA FISHERIES CLAIM    
    The fisheries portion of the Muriwhenua claim was heard in
1986 and 1987 and the finding brought down in 1988.   The claim
was brought by the five Muriwhenua Tribes: tribes who in terms of
Maori geography live at the tail of   Te Ika a Maui   (Figure
4a) far removed from the goings on in the power centre at Te Upoko
o te Ika.   In terms of   pakeha   geography the area
concerned is the northern portion of the Northland Peninsula
(Figure 4b).   Both geographical imageries emphasise the very
significant interdependence between land and sea in this
region.  
  The Muriwhenua claim has two strands, one to do with land, the
other to do with fisheries.   Events within and beyond Muriwhenua
gave urgency to the fisheries portion of the claim (it may be some
time in 1990 that the land claim hearings are resumed).   There
were two key questions raised by the Muriwhenua Fisheries claim:
1. who owns the fish in the sea?
  2. If Maori have fishing rights as a result of the Treaty are
these (a) traditional and non commercial or (b) traditional and
commercial?  
    The answers to these questions are provided partly by the
Treaty text and partly by the evidence about Maori fishing prior to
and about the year 1840.   The evidence of the text is in the
texts of the Treaty.   In article 2 the tribes are given
  'full exclusive and undisturbed possession of their lands
estates forests fisheries and other properties for so long as it is
their wish and desire to retain the same'  .   In the years
since 1840 there were many land purchases and some of these
specified forests and minerals which went with particular pieces of
land.   There were very few, if any, purchases of fisheries.
  In 148 years between the Treaty and the Muriwhenua finding the
Crown did nothing to purchase fisheries from Maori tribes.   The
evidence from the text of the Treaty was clear and the chance for
the Crown or other parties to give evidence of any subsequent sales
of fisheries was not taken up.   The finding is clear: Maori
tribes have not sold the fisheries which they used in the
1830s.  
    The great wealth of evidence considered by the Tribunal
related to the nature and extent of Maori fisheries: the range and
variety of fish caught and the scale and complexity of the economic
organisation involved.   Three sorts of evidence, each quite
separate, mesh together to confirm a similar picture.  
      Archaeological Evidence:   Many shells and
fishbones are big enough and robust enough to survive for
centuries.   Fish caught at sea were eaten on shore and the
remains accumulated in rubbish heaps which became  'middens' beloved
of archaeologists.   From these middens scientists like Dr Janet
Davidson of the Auckland Institute and Dr Atholl Anderson of the
University of Otago are able to work out what fish were caught,
where and in what quantities (Davidson, 1984&semi; Anderson, 1987).  
      Contemporary European Observers:   Documentation of
European observations began with Tasman and became much more
detailed when Cook 's scientific team arrived in 1769.   Joseph
Banks, for example, made entries in his diary when the
  Endeavour   was at the Bay of Islands on 4th and 5th
December 1769.   English and Maori fishers compared equipment and
catches.   Banks records the Maori reaction to the gear carried
by the   Endeavour:  
      ... after having a little laught at our sein
(the Maori) shewd us one of theirs which was 5 fathom deep and its
length we could only guess, as it was not stretchd out,
  figure 2  
but it could not from its bulk be less than 4 or 500 fathom
(700-900 metres).   Fishing seems to be the cheif business of
this part of the countrey&semi; about all their towns are abundance of
netts laid upon small heaps like hay cocks and thatchd over and
almost every house you go into has netts in its making (Waitangi
Tribunal, 1988, 42, quoting from Beaglehole, 1955, 1,
444).        
    Savage in 1806 and Nicholas in 1814 added more detail.
  Nicholas, for example, noted that   'their nets are much
larger than that made use of in Europe'   and one of them
   'very often gives employment to a whole village'  
(Waitangi Tribunal, 1988, 43).   De Roux, an ensign on a French
ship which visited in 1772, recorded Maori fishing nets 140 to 180
metres long and 1.5 to 2 metres deep.   Colenso sums up fishing
about 1840 in these terms:
        They (the Maori) were very great consumers
of fish ... The seas around their coasts swarmed with excellent
fish and crayfish&semi; the rocky and sandy shores abounded with good
shellfish ... The rivers and lakes contained ... plenty of small
fish and fine mussels and small crayfish&semi; the marshes and swamps
were full of large rich eels ... In seeking all of these, they knew
the proper seasons when, as well as the best manner how, to take
them ... Sometimes they would go in large canoes to a deep
sea-fishing, to some well known shoal or rock, 5 to 10 miles from
the shore and return with a quantity of large cod, snapper, and
other prime fish&semi; sometimes they would use very large drag nets,
and enclose great numbers of grey mullet, dogfish, mackerel and
other fish which swim in shoals&semi; of which (especially of dogfish
and of mackerel) they dried immense quantities for winter use
(Waitangi 
  Figure 3  
Tribunal, 1988, 44, citing Colenso, 1868,
9).        
    These sorts of evidence - from scientists and historians -
were familiar ground for a legal tribunal.   The next strand was
very different.  
      Oral evidence from Kaumatua:   A very large map of
Muriwhenua showing land features in detail and the sea as blank was
put up.   Maori   Kaumatua   (Elders) came forward one by
one to share knowledge handed down through the generations.
  Each shared the knowledge of their own   hapu   or
subtribe: when they fished&semi; where they fished&semi; for what species&semi;
with what gear.   The location of each fishery was described by
reference to landmarks on shore.   As they spoke each location
was plotted on the blank map and at the end of the evidence all of
the significant fishing areas had been filled in.   The final
report summed up their contribution in these terms:
        The libraries of their minds are replete
with an enormous treasure trove of ancient practices, customs,
beliefs and laws telling of the huge reliance upon the seas in days
gone by.   Several hundred fishing grounds were named and
identified in detail, up to 25 miles at sea, with descriptions
given of their locations as fixed by cross bearings from the land,
the fish species associated with each, and the times to fish there.
  It was soon obvious to us, from the spread of such grounds,
that Muriwhenua fishermen had worked the whole of the inshore seas
and that all workable depths were known (Waitangi Tribunal, 1988,
xiv).        
      These three strands of evidence meshed together
exactly.   As a result the nature and extent of Maori fishing
before and after the Treaty were spelt out.  
    The evidence as it was presented, and the findings of the
Tribunal when they were brought down in 1988, caused flurries of
excitement among commercial fishermen, Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries and Government.   Maori were clearly entitled to sea
fisheries.   Maori had been progressively excluded by legislation
and actions of the Crown from the 1860s onwards.   The most
significant injustice of all came from the system of Individual
Transferable Quotas (ITQs) introduced in 1986 as a management tool
designed to prevent overfishing.   ITQs, designed to control the
total harvest of each specie, were allocated to commercial
fishermen who could document a substantial catch history during the
previous four or five seasons.  
    The Tribunal acknowledged that the intentions were good and
then highlighted the impact of the decision on Maori:
        ... the by-catch was to privatise the
greater part of the fishing resource, and to gift property rights,
of some value, to those who had been responsible for overfishing.
  figure 4  
  The value of the exclusive rights of commercial fishing so far
apportioned to individual fishermen is worth over one billion
dollars on the quota exchange.   The annual rental return to the
Crown is currently some $21 million (Waitangi Tribunal, 1988,
xx).        
    The introduction of ITQs caused special hardship in
Muriwhenua where land resources were used in conjunction with
fishing.   Most Muriwhenua fishermen combined fishing with
farming and most combined fishing for home consumption with fishing
for the local market.   Most quotas were allocated to commercial
fishing boats operating from larger ports outside of Muriwhenua.
  The final irony was that the ITQ system effectively excluded
most Muriwhenua fishermen from commercial fishing.  
    The findings of the Tribunal were clear.   As it is
presently arranged the Quota Management System is contrary to the
Treaty.   Government and Maori Tribes must sit down, in equal
numbers, on opposite sides of the negotiating table and work out a
basis for the future.   This process is ongoing: there have been
extended negotiations during 1988 and 1989 and the Fisheries Bill
is working its way through Select Committee stages.   At the same
time the Fishing Industry Board and the Fishing Industry
Association have appealed to the High Court against the findings of
the Waitangi Tribunal on Muriwhenua Fisheries.  
      CONCLUSION    
    The Tribunal in its membership and style of working models
a bicultural partnership.   Its major contributions are
threefold: it provides a way of sorting out grievances which have
festered for up to 150 years&semi; it enables Maori insights into
conservation and resource management to find their way into
environmental and planning law&semi; its findings challenge Government
to restore to Maori tribes the type of economic base which will
enable them to participate fully in the New Zealand economy of the
future.      
  

          CHAPTER 2 Perception of risk      
        2.1 Risk      
    Risks can be described as the   "quantitative
measure of hazard consequences"   (Gough, 1988, p.8).
  Four different evaluations of future risk can be
identified (Starr   et     al  ., 1976, p.629).
    (1)   Real risk   is determined by
future circumstances when they eventually occur or develop
fully.
  (2)   Statistical risk   is determined by
currently available historical data, typically measured
actuarilly (for insurance purposes).   It is based on
observed frequencies which can be evaluated by normal
statistical means.
  (3)   Predicted risk   is predicted analytically
from systems models structured from historical data.
  (4)   Perceived risk   is seen intuitively by
individuals.    
    Technical interpretations use statistical measures of
risk and formal methods of risk evaluation.   Flood
magnitude and flood frequency are of particular importance in
determining the future probabilities of flood risk.
  However, public perceptions of risk (covers beliefs
regarding likelihood of occurrence and causality, as well as
evaluations of risk) often diverge from these 'technical
frameworks'.  
    Burton and Kates (1964, p.417) identify this
  "hiatus between popular perception of hazard and the
technical-scientific perception.   To many flood-plain
users, floods are preventable, i.e. flood control can
completely eliminate the hazard.   Yet the technical expert
knows that except for very small drainage areas no flood
control works known can effectively prevent the flood-inducing
concentration of precipitation, nor can they effectively
control extremely large floods of very rare
occurrence."    
        2.2 Influences on risk perception      
    Perception, or social perception specifically, is
  "the process by which a person gives meaning to what
they see... (It) is the filter through which the external
environment is given meaning by a person"   (Ericksen,
1986, p.39).   Factors that influence the process include
past experiences&semi; existing attitudes, values and motivation&semi;
personality&semi; and future expectations.   These are shaped by
social and cultural conditions such as family, education,
occupation, religion, and age (Ibid.).  
    Ericksen (Ibid., p.40) suggests that, based on the
findings of past research, four main factors can influence lay
perception of hazards (in this case flooding):
    (1)   knowledge   and   past
experience   of the event&semi;
  (2) interpretation of various physical characteristics of
the hazard, including flood   magnitude   and
  frequency&semi;  
  (3)   geographical situation   of the floodplain
occupant&semi; i.e.   urban   or   rural&semi;  
  (4)   personality traits.      
    Interviews carried out by the East Cape Catchment
Board (1987, p.3) with residents of Opotiki found a general
lack of     knowledge     of the statistical
meaning of the so-called 100-year flood&semi; only 15% of those
interviewed appeared to understand.   The Board is working
on an initiative to describe flood risk in terms of the 50%
probability concept and not that of  'return periods'.  
    Residents of Paeroa also demonstrated an erroneous or
inadequate understanding of the  'return period' concept
used by technical experts.   Over 42% of those interviewed
implied that it meant     "  a regular
cycle"   (Erickson, 1986, p.44).  
    Research indicates that there is a dominant
relationship between     past
experience     and expectation of future flood
events&semi; a greater past experience is more likely to yield more
accurate views of the probabilities of past and future flood
distributions.   The town of Opotiki has experienced
extensive flooding on a number of occasions (Ericksen, 1986,
p.42).   A recent study (East Cape Catchment Board,
1988) showed that 78% of those interviewed considered the
flood risk of Opotiki to be medium to high, and 74% consider
it is likely Opotiki will be flooded within the next 50
years.  
    However there are important exceptions to this rule.
   Erickson (Ibid., p.44) discusses interviews carried out
in Paeroa after a recent flood experience.   Forty-four
percent did not expect flooding to occur again&semi; most of these
people implied it was a 'freak' experience yet a scientist 's 
estimate was that there was a 14% chance of recurrence in a
10-year period.  
    Factors such as the     magnitude    
and     frequency     of past flooding and how
that affected the individual in a temporal and spatial manner
can influence and distort a person 's perception of past events
(Ibid., p.40).   Ericksen reports on risk perception of two
flood-prone communities&semi; Greymouth and Opotiki.   It appears
that people who are exposed to relatively frequent flood
experiences have reduced expectations of larger future events
(Ibid., pp.41-42).  
    Research into the 1974 Brisbane floods found that
after 14 months the usual fading of memory and the development
of consensus interpretations of the disaster distorted
  victims'   views (Luketina, 1985, p.31).  
    Ericksen (1986, p.42) refers to the notion of
'gambler 's fallacy' that affects lay perception of flooding.
  It assumes the reduced likelihood of an event
happening in any one year if it has happened the previous
year.   In contrast, scientists view floods as random events
that have the same probability of happening in one year as the
next.   Ericksen suggests that this fallacy might be more
prevalent in areas of infrequent flooding.  
    Where the event is infrequent, failure to perceive a
significant hazard is widely shared (Burton and Kates, 1964,
p.429).  
    Studies by Burton and Kates (1964, p.428) suggest that
    urban   and   rural    
floodplain users display different perceptions of the flood
hazard.   Agricultural land users exhibit a greater hazard
sensitivity in terms of awareness.   Erickson compares
perceptions of rural and urban floodplain occupants.   He
has found that closeness to nature tends to align farmers more
closely to scientists in their views of flooding (Ericksen
1986, p.40).  
    The fourth factor, that is,     personality
traits    , affects the attitudes people have towards
natural events.   These include   "attitudes towards
fate (ranging from  'disasters are acts of God' to 'individuals
create disasters')&semi; belief in the efficacy of Government
acting (ranging from 'the catchment board will solve the
flooding' to the need for personal action): views of
people-nature relationships (including dominance, harmony, and
subjugation)&semi; and risk-taking behaviour"   (Ibid.,
p.9).    
      2.3 Technological solutions    
    Public perceptions may contain contradictions and
inconsistencies.   Burton and Kates (1964, p.432) point to
the widespread belief in the technical engineering solutions
to problems of hazards.   Optimism about the recurrence of
future floods may correlate with knowledge and familiarity
with flood protection works.   People are lulled into a
false sense of security without realising that structures are
built to withhold a specific flood capacity.   Problems
occur when the design capacity is exceeded by an infrequent
event.  
    Ericksen (1986, pp.43-44) refers to studies carried
out on flood-prone communities in New Zealand.   In
Otorohanga, a small community on the floodplain of the Waipa
River, it was found that 13 years after a major flood, no-one
expected a future flood.   Half of those interviewed held
this view because of confidence in stop bank protection
completed in response to the previous major flood.  
    Luketina (1985, p.11) reviews studies of flood hazard
perceptions.   Research indicates that even when people are
informed of the hazard-prone nature of their locality they
appear to deny the danger.   Responses indicate an "it won't
happen here" attitude.   In cases of denial it cannot be
assumed that attempts to raise the hazard consciousness of the
general public will have the desired effect.  
      2.4 Perceptions of past and future
risk    
    The main factors that can influence flood risk
perception tested in the survey were: knowledge and past
experience of the event, geographical situation of the
floodplain, and personality traits.  
    The order of the results and discussion relating to
this section differs from the questionnaire format&semi; it was
suggested at the questionnaire design stage that a less
demanding section at the beginning could encourage people to
respond more readily.  
    All tables marked with an * indicate
  respondents'   first choice where they were asked to
rank options.   Some gave more than one first choice&semi; this
accounts for why some percentage totals exceed 100
slightly.  
      2.4.1     Perceptions of past and
future risk - findings    
    These questions investigate the public perception of
risk from flooding of the Waimakariri River as a past and
future problem, and possible influences upon that
perception.  
    Question D.2.   When asked to indicate how safe
respondents felt from the risk of flooding from the
Waimakariri over the   last   five years, they were
given a scale of discrete categories from 'completely safe' to
'at extreme risk'.  
  table 2.1 Perception of past risk  
    D.3.   The most frequent reasons given by those who
felt completely safe or safe included -
  table 2.2 Why safe in past?  
  Those who felt at risk or at extreme risk did so because -
  table 2.3 Why at risk in past?    
    D.4.       "How safe do you think your
property is from the risk of flooding from the Waimakariri
over the   next   10 years?"    
  table 2.4 Perception of future risk    
    D.5.   Reasons given for feelings of safety or
complete safety were -
  table 2.5 Why safe in future?    
    Those who felt at risk or at extreme risk did so
because -
  table 2.6 Why at risk in future?    
    D.6.       "In your opinion, how likely is
it that a major flood by the Waimakariri will cause
significant damage to the greater Christchurch urban area
within the next 30 years?"    
  table 2.7 Perception of future risk to greater
Christchurch urban area    
      2.4.2 Perceptions of past and future risk -
discussion    
    Seventy-two per cent of ratepayers surveyed have felt
safe or completely safe from flooding of the Waimakariri over
the past five years.   Only 7% perceived themselves to be at
moderate or extreme risk in the past.  
    Comments from those who perceived themselves to have
been safe in the past included reference to large upper basins
combined with stopbanks, the capacity of the river to cope
with large volumes of water, protection received from
stopbanks, faith in engineers and no previous problems.
  Those on the north side believed they were favoured by
height above sea level.  
    Those who felt they were at risk believed that high
water levels had been reached at times, a build up of shingle
exacerbated flooding problems, there were limitations on the
height of stopbanks, a 100-year flood would overtop the
stopbanks, and that the 'greenhouse effect' and depletion of
the ozone layer were causing increased rainfall.  
    Perceptions changed with regard to personal risk of
flooding over the next 10 years.   Fifty-eight per cent felt
they were safe or completely safe while 9% believed they faced
moderate to extreme risk in the future.   Thirty-three per
cent took a neutral position or did not know whether they
faced a personal risk of flooding.   Reasons given for these
perceptions were similar to those given by respondents when
offering their perceptions of whether or not they perceived
that they had faced a past risk.   Those who were optimistic
believed that measures had already been taken, they were
well out of the flood path, providence would prevail, and that
there had been no major flooding of the Waimakariri during the
past 75 years.  
    Those who perceived a future risk offered reasons such
as increasing rainfall attributable to the 'greenhouse effect'
and depletion of the ozone layer, few measures (preventative
presumably) were being taken, we are unable to predict future
happenings/events, that is, the unpredictability of nature,
and the fact that the river has been very close to breaking
its banks every year.  
    Forty-one percent perceived that flooding of the
greater Christchurch Urban Area is an improbability or highly
improbable during the next 30 years.   Twenty-four percent
believed that it was probable or very probable, 24% took a
neutral position while 11% did not know.   Reasons for these
views were not solicited.  
    The weighted mean value falls over time from 4.1 for
past risk to 3.9 for future risk (see Tables 2.1 and 2.4).
  Although the weighted mean value for risk to the greater
Christchurch urban area during the next 30 years is 2.8 (Table
2.7), it would actually equate with 3.3 if the options ranged
from 5 to 1. and not 1 to 5.   In other words, while the
weighted mean tends towards the  'safe' end of the scales in
these three tables, people appear to feel less confident
towards future risk than this result suggests.   A greater
degree of uncertainty is also expressed over time: 21%
indicated a neutral (indicated by the number 3 on the scale)
or  'don't know' position regarding past risk, as did 33%
regarding safety over the next 10 years, and 35% over the next
30 years.  
      2.5 Factors influencing risk
perception    
    The next sections explore the relationships underlying
the responses to questions on perceived risk.  
      2.5.1 Past experience of flooding    
    Question C.1 investigated how long the respondents had
lived at their present site on the floodplain.  
  table 2.8 Length of occupancy on floodplain  
    Questions C.2 and C.3 enquired whether respondents had
experienced flooding of the Waimakariri River at their present
site and/or whether they had personal experience of their
property being flooded elsewhere in New Zealand.  
  table 2.9 Past riverine flooding experience  
    C.4.   When inquiring about the number of years
since the respondent had last experienced flooding the
following results were obtained.  
  table 2.10 Years since past flooding experience  
  table 2.11 Perceived risk in past by Waimakariri flood
experience  
  table 2.12 Perceived risk in future by Waimakariri flood
experience  
      2.5.2 Past experience of flooding -
discussion    
    It was found that floodplain residents who have
experienced flood damage are more likely to view flooding as a
past and future problem than floodplain residents who have
not experienced     damaged    damage     by
flooding.  
    Only 15% of respondents have lived on the Waimakariri
floodplain for more than 30 years (the river last flooded in
1957).   One third have owned property there for five years
or fewer.   Five per cent of respondents claimed to have
been flooded by the Waimakariri River in the past.  
    A check of some of the   respondents'  
locality and length of occupation on the floodplain showed a
lack of correlation.   This could be attributable to
occupation of a different property previously, or there
could have been an erroneous understanding of causes of
previous flooding.   The figure of 5% is therefore slightly
higher than is probably the actual situation.  
      Past experience   of flooding of the
Waimakariri influenced   respondents'   perceptions of
both past and future risk (see Tables 2.11 and 2.12).
  Nearly 30% of those who had experienced flooding in the
past felt at risk or at extreme risk over the past five years
whereas only 6% of those with no past experience of flooding
of the Waimakariri felt at risk.  
    Twenty-four per cent of those with previous
Waimakariri experience believe they are at risk or at extreme
risk from flooding over the next 10 years while only 8% of
those with no past experience share the same fears.  
    Fifteen per cent have had experience of flooding
elsewhere in New Zealand.   No statistical relationship was
found between this past experience and their perceptions of
risk from the Waimakariri.   For most of those who had
experienced flooding elsewhere, approximately only
one-sixth indicated this had occurred within the past 10 years
(see Table 2.10).  
      2.5.3 Geographical situation (i.e. risk class)
on floodplain - findings    
  table 2.13 Perceived risk in past by risk class  
  table 2.14 Perceived risk in future by risk class  
  Question D.1.       "Did you realise that your
property is situated on a floodplain?"    
  table 2.15 Realisation that property on floodplain  
  table 2.16 Risk class by realisation on floodplain  
  table 2.17 Realise on floodplain by safe in past  
  table 2.18 Realise on floodplain by safe in future    
      2.5.4 Geographical situation on the floodplain
- discussion    
      Geographical situation (rural/urban)   on
the floodplain did influence perception to a limited extent&semi; a
weak relationship was found between risk class and feelings of
safety both in the past and in the future.   A greater
number of those who live closest to the river perceived a past
risk (12%) than those who face a lesser degree or risk (3% and
4% respectively) (see Table 2.13).   Conversely, greater
numbers in risk classes 2 and 3 felt safe or completely safe
than did those in class 1.   A similar picture emerged with
regard to future risk (see Table 2.14).  
    One interesting observation arose when questionnaire
returns were compared between risk classes.   Sixty-one per
cent of Classes A and B participated in the survey, as did 55%
of Classes C and D, and 53% of Classes E and F and others (see
Table 1.1).   One of the reasons for a lower comparative
return from at risk Classes C to F could be attributed to an
absence of perceived risk.  
    Nearly one-third of respondents were unaware that
their property was situated on a floodplain (Table 2.13).
  These were not confined solely to any one risk class (see
Table 2.14).   A surprising revelation was that nearly 40%
of those in risk class 2 (which equates with Classes C and D
in Fig. 1.2) are not aware they own property on a floodplain
yet those who face a lower level of risk (risk class 3) have
an increased awareness.  
    A weak relationship was found to exist between an
awareness that the property one owns is located on the
floodplain and a feeling of safety both in the past and in the
future (Tables 2.17 and 2.18).   Fewer of those who realise
they live on a floodplain felt safe or completely safe in the
past than those who were not aware.   A difference in past
and future perceptions of risk was also manifest in this
sub-group.  
      2.5.5 Personality traits - findings    
    (Tables marked with an * indicate   respondents'  
first choice where they were asked to rank options.)  
    A.1     "Some people believe floods are caused
by the way we use our land close to rivers, some believe that
floods are 'an act of God' or a natural event.   Others
believe that floods are caused by a combination of these
things."       Respondents were asked to rank a
number of options to indicate what they felt were the main
causes of floods.  
  *table 2.19 Attribution of flood causation  
    A.2     "Who do you think is most responsible
for making preparations so that a major flood does as little
damage as possible to your home and family?"      
  *table 2.20 Responsibility for mitigating flood damage  
      2.5.6 Personality traits -
discussion    
    Fifty-four per cent attributed causation of flooding
to nature.   Twenty-six per cent blamed upper catchment land
use while 11% saw floodplain land use as a major factor
although the word   "exacerbate"   in the question
rather than   "cause"   might have produced a
different response.   Nonetheless 37% are aware of the role
of human activities and land use in hazard situations.  
    Although 54% of respondents indicated that Nature was
the major 'cause' of flooding, this could not be demonstrated
statistically to have influenced their perception of past and
future risk.   Nor did their views on the culpability of
upper catchment and floodplain land use.
    Personality traits   did not appear to
influence flood perception.  
    Only 4% saw a role for the individual in the
prevention of flood damage.   Responsibility was seen to lie
with the Catchment Board by almost two-thirds of respondents.
  This could indicate a belief that structural controls are
the only way flood damage can be mitigated.   Only
approximately one-fifth of respondents were amenable to
the concept underlying the 'Urban Flood Loss Reduction
Policy', namely that a combination of structural and
non-structural measures can reduce flood damage.  
      2.5.7 Knowledge of event - findings    
    B.1.       "What do you think the term
'100-year flood' means?
    a. A flood of a certain size that occurs once
every one hundred years.
  b. A flood of a certain size that has a 1% chance of
occurring in any one year."        
  table 2.21 Understanding of flood return periods  
      2.5.8 Knowledge of event -
discussion    
    There was an almost even split between those who
appeared to understand the technical term '100-year flood' and
those who did not.   However, it is not possible to
determine whether those who answered correctly actually do
understand or whether a guess was attempted.  
    When the survey was designed it was intended to test
whether floodplain occupants understand probabilities of
risk expressed as a percentage over a period of time better
than they understand statistical notions of risk that refer to
return periods.   Catchment Board staff believed the
questions posed were too difficult for most people to answer
so the author chose a simpler 'either/or' option.  
    Other studies suggest that the term '100-year flood'
is not well understood by the general public.   The
implications of this finding are that specific
probabilities of risk around which flood management
options are designed should be described in terms that the
public are able to understand.  
    Statistical analysis did not reveal any relationship
between   respondents'   flood   knowledge   and
their perceptions of risk, both past and future.  
        2.6 Summary    
    Occupants of the Waimakariri River floodplain have
felt safe from flooding over the past five years.   Their
own reasons indicated that they had faith in structural
controls, a lack of awareness of risk and a belief that the
characteristics of the river such as large upper basins
and the capacity of the river bed to cope with large
quantities of water could reduce the likelihood of
flooding.  
    Of the factors suggested by the literature as
influencing risk perception, a weak relationship was found
between perception and past flooding experience of the
Waimakariri.   However, as only a very few people had had
this experience this finding should be viewed with caution.
  A weak relationship appeared between perception and
geographical situation on the floodplain (risk class).   No
relationship was found between perception and flood knowledge,
and perception and personality traits.  
    People thought that they were moderately safe against
future risk over the next 10 years&semi; a change in perception
appeared from that towards risk in the past.   A higher
proportion believed they were facing a degree of risk in the
future (10% v. 7%) and a lower proportion indicated feelings
of safety (58% v. 72%).   Faith in structural controls, the
fact that there were perceived to be no previous problems,
positive river capacity, plus distance from the river were
cited as reasons for feeling safe.   Reasons for feeling
unsafe in the future included the effects of climatic changes
attributable to the 'greenhouse effect' and depletion of the
ozone layer, the unpredictability of nature, and a belief in
being unable to predict future events.  
    Factors predicted in the literature to influence
perception of past risk also influenced perception of future
risk.  
    The above outcomes could be attributed to the fact
that flooding of the Waimakariri River is an infrequent
occurrence.   Few of those who live on the floodplain at
present were there at the time of the last major flood in
1957.   The fact that weak or very weak relationships were
found between risk perception and past flood experience
could be attributable to the fading of long-term memory.
  However, even if the Waimakariri had flooded, say, within
the past five years, it is difficult to know whether these
outcomes might have been considerably different.  
    It is also not possible to say what effect this survey
may have had in alerting people to potential future
risk.      

  

      National population dynamics: the reproductive
revolution  
    Maori population dynamics in this period were
dominated by a decline in fertility.   This trend reached
its most accelerated pitch in the mid 1970s.   The key
changes are shown in Table 8.2 and Figure 8.1.  
    Fertility declines were most rapid in the 1970s,
dropping from 5.0 live births per woman in 1971 to 3.0 in
1976.   The most accelerated changes came at older ages.
  By 1983, Maori fertility was close to the 
  Figure 8.1: Family Formation Patterns, Maori and Total
Populations, 1962, 1971, 1982  
  Table 8.2: Crude Birth Rates, Age-specific Fertility
Rates, Total Fertility Rates, and Gross Reproduction Rates,
1966-86  
Pakeha level (Maori TFR = 2.2, as against 1.9   TFR=Total
Fertility Rate  ), and in fact Maori age-specific rates were
lower at older ages.   The Maori synthetic early
childbearing rate (similar to TFR but more 'localised') was
1.2 births per woman, but only 0.6 for Pakeha, whereas from 25
to 39 years it was 1.0 for Maori as against 1.5 for
non-Maori.  
    Family-formation patterns were thus still rather
different from Pakeha even though the TFRs were very close.
  These patterns are clearly affected by a cultural
difference in approaches to creating families, not in the
overall dimensions of a family.   Among Maori   'The
debate today appears to centre around the timing of the
commencement and the limitation of childbearing, but not
whether or not to have children'   (Douglas   et
al  . 1981 pp.43-48, summarised in Sceats 1988b, p.389).
  High levels of early childbearing by Maori may be followed
by close birth-spacing, which would abrogate traditional Maori
norms, for   'the desire to "get it over and done with
as quickly as possible" appears to occur across all ethnic
groups... and its negative connotation is somewhat at odds
with the other generally favourable attitudes towards
childbearing and rearing'   (Sceats 1988b, p.390).
  Unfortunately, parity data from vital statistics are
severely flawed (Pool &amp; Sceats 1981, pp.86-89), so that it is
difficult to examine this issue in detail.  
    What is clear, however, is that Maori reproduction was
(and still is) concentrated at younger ages.   Their levels
of teenage fertility were exceptionally high, although also
declining (Table 8.2).   In the developed countries in
the early 1980s Maori levels were surpassed - not just for
teenage fertility rates, but also for the degree of
concentration at the youngest teen ages - only by the Black
American population (Table 8.3).   In 1971 Maori rates
resembled those of the least developed countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America.   The 1983 rate was still close to
those poorer Latin American nations, such as Ecuador, Paraguay
and Peru (United Nations 1988a, Table 117).   It must be
stressed that teenage fertility puts both the mother and baby
at risk, not only in health terms, but also for schooling and
employment, and that this may set in train multi-generational
patterns of disadvantage.  
    The mechanism for achieving low fertility,
particularly from age 25 years on, was the resort to very
efficient contraception and sterilisation.   Pill use is
slightly higher among non-Maori than Maori but sterilisation
  Table 8.3: Teenage Fertility, Selected Populations  
and contraceptive injection are more prevalent among Maori
than Pakeha.   For both of these methods New Zealand levels
appear to be among the highest in the developed countries and
for sterilisation may be among the highest anywhere (Sceats &amp;
Pool 1985b, pp.190-1).   The percentage of New Zealand women
currently using a method of contraception is very high, so
that the similarity of Maori and non-Maori rates indicates
that both Maori and Pakeha are nearing the end of their
fertility transition.  
    It must be stressed that abortion, data for which are
given in Table 8.4, was not an important mechanism in the
fertility decline.   Both Maori and non-Maori levels of
induced fetal loss in 1983 were lower than for all other
comparable populations with good data except the Netherlands.
  Moreover, for Maori and Pakeha, unlike Pacific
Islanders, abortion was at younger ages, so that it was
being used for the timing of the first birth, rather than for
birth limitation.   This is yet 
  Table 8.4: Maori and Other Ethnic Groups: Total Abortion
Rates (per Woman), 1983-86 and Age-Specific Abortion Rates
(per 1000), 1986  
another piece of evidence of the passage of Maori through the
fertility transition (Sceats 1988b &amp; c).  
    The last few paragraphs have described one of the
world 's most rapid reproductive revolutions, equalling or even
exceeding other fast transitions, such as the Thai or Chinese.
  Declines came at all ages, but were more radical at 25
years and over.   The decrease in fertility described here
resulted from the adoption of modern contraception and
sterilisation, primarily for family limitation, rather than
for the timing and spacing of pregnancies.   Induced
abortion played a very minor role.    
    Explaining the Maori fertility decline  
    So far only the mechanisms of the transition have been
discussed&semi; now it is necessary to analyse its determinants.
  These can be summarised by arguing that this
remarkable fertility decline occurred generally for
reasons that closely fit demographic transition theory,
reviewed in chapter 1.   It outlines and attempts to
explain the shift from high mortality and high fertility,
producing low rates of natural increase&semi; through
decreasing death rates, and thus accelerating rates of natural
increase&semi; followed by declines in levels of reproduction,
resulting in a deceleration of the rates of natural
increase&semi; to a final stage when mortality and fertility rates
are both low, and rates of natural increase are once again
very low, but for different reasons from those at the outset
of the transition.  
    By 1966, Maori had reached the takeoff point for the
third of these stages, a rapid decline in fertility.   The
pre-conditions were all in place.   Mortality had already
declined significantly, survivorship of infants and children
was high by any standards, and rates of natural increase were
approaching biological maxima.   Moreover, other
socio-economic determinants were present: the population was
now highly urbanised, while education had been universal for
about a century.   There was also close contact and often
intermarriage with a population with low fertility values.
  Finally, effective means of contraception were available
and information on them was being diffused through regional
leadership conferences already by the early 1960s (Pool 1964,
pp.404-5).  
    It would therefore have been surprising if Maori
fertility had not declined.   If their levels of natality
had remained high, they would have been unique among
populations, including indigenous minorities, having the
attributes just listed.   These will now be examined in
further detail.  
    Universal education is often cited as an important
determinant of fertility declines, because of the twin effects
of attitude and value formation in younger generations and a
shift in patterns of economic support between generations
(inter-generational transfers).   Cleland and Wilson, in a
very wide-ranging review, conclude that   'the timing of
transition is strongly influenced by cultural boundaries and
is associated with indicators of social development, such as
literacy, rather than economic indicators'   (1987,
p.27).   The case relating to inter-generational transfers,
an economic argument here crudely summarised, would be that
schoolchildren can no longer contribute to household economic
activities, while even a free school system involves some
costs (see Caldwell 1980&semi; a general review of decline theories
is in Freedman 1982).  
    Thus a rather pertinent question, given a century of
universal literacy attained through a school system which is
culturally Pakeha, is why Maori fertility did not decline
earlier.   Here the argument must be switched to acknowledge
the role of other variables within the broader complex area of
culture.   Culture has been seen as   'a mediating
factor'  , which, for example, explains the slower
declines of fertility among Muslims in southern Thailand than
among Buddhist Thais (Knodel, Apichat &amp; Nibhon 1987, p.202).
  For Maori, it could be postulated that Maoritanga (value
system), focused on a complex form of social organisation
emphasising the lineage, has remained resilient even among
those urban Maori who share in common with Pakeha neighbours,
and even spouses, many features of day-to-day lifestyles (cf.
the force of social organisations in Africa, Cleland &amp; Wilson
1987, p.27).   For example, Douglas has demonstrated the
persistence of strongly pro-natalist norms and cultural props
(1977).   In a sample covering both urban and rural Maori he
and his colleagues showed that these norms were focused more
narrowly on the maintenance of family structures and on
familialistic norms (whanautanga) and more widely on kinship
values (whanaungatanga).   In the 1980s, after more than 150
years of co-residence with Pakeha, these norms still far more
closely resembled those of Asia than of Pakeha New Zealand
(Population Div. ESCAP 1986, drawing on Douglas 1981 and other
New Zealand and Asian studies).  
    Maori norms were sufficiently powerful to
counter-balance the impact of minority status and close
interaction with the relatively low-fertility Pakeha society.
  For some Maori, fertility and rapid growth were still seen
to be mechanisms for cultural maintenance, somewhat akin to
the    'revenge of the cradles'   catch-cry of
francophone Quebecois politicians in the 1960s.   Thus even
before the transition got under way, there was concern that
the adoption of contraception might not be of benefit to the
Maori (Pool 1964, p.404, quoting Tairawhiti Regional
Leadership Conference, 1962).   At the end of the transition
there was still debate on this issue.   In a Waikato-based
study,   'A significant number of respondents reported
that their male relations encourage and their female relatives
discourage childbearing...   Many respondents felt that to
be Maori required them to have large families because the two
were identified as being compatible and until recently
occurring together'   (Douglas 1981, pp.43-48).  
    Early marriage and family formation were the essential
mechanisms by which this could be achieved, so that as
recently as 1971, two-thirds of Maori women in their early
twenties had already been married, according to census data.
  This percentage declined in the 1970s, dropping to 55 per
cent (Pool 1986b).   This shift was, however, associated
with other changes in Maori nuclear-family structures beyond
the scope of the present analysis.   Nevertheless, it is
important to note in passing that when a transition in family
formation occurred, it took a somewhat different form from
that followed by Pakeha.   For example, in 1981 25 per cent
of Maori solo parents had never married, as against 14 per
cent of Pakeha.   Twenty per cent of one-parent Maori
households has a mother (usually) or father aged less than 20
years.   As Maori families were larger than Pakeha, there
were also differences at the other end of the reproductive
span: there were more Maori than non-Maori solo parents who
were widow(er)s still with dependent children born relatively
late in their   parents'   reproductive span.
  Against this only 48 per cent of Maori one-parent families
were headed by a divorced or separated person, as against 72
per cent of Pakeha (Butterworth &amp; Mako 1989, Table 2.7).
  By 1981, only 56 per cent of Maori infants (aged less than
1 year) were in two-parent households, while a further 29 per
cent were in extended families&semi; but 15 per cent were in
one-parent households, double the level for Pacific Islanders
and five times that for Pakeha (SMG 1989, Appendix 1c).  
    Eventually, however, Maori fertility did decline,
following a very sharp trajectory.   The question then
arises why this should finally have occurred, given the
apparent strength of cultural props.   Demographic
transition theory provides some leads from analyses across an
enormous range of societies, cultures and populations -
Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, Animist or Buddhist&semi;
minority or majority&semi; capitalist or marxist-leninist&semi; tribal
or nation-state&semi; colonial, post-colonial or never colonised.
  The conclusions are remarkably consistent and
deterministic: a decrease in fertility seems inevitable
once a certain threshold - usually a complex of factors:
increased survivorship, urbanisation, education, availability
of efficient means of fertility regulation - has been
passed.  
    For Maori this threshold was determined by improved
survivorship and high levels of urbanisation, achieved prior
to the period covered in this chapter but at a time in which
efficient means of fertility regulation were available.
  This reinforced the long period of exposure of Maori to an
education system which is Pakeha, or more correctly 'Western'
in orientation, something which holds true for the majority of
the world 's schoolchildren and tertiary students.
  Nevertheless, this system does draw its rationale and many
underlying cultural values from outside Maori society.
  Thus it can be argued that long-term exposure of Maori to
formal, and informal, education and communications should
have played some role.   But it seems that the impact of the
education system was more as a reinforcement of attitudinal
changes within Maori society leading to the onset of the
transition, than a necessary or significant pre-condition of
it.  
    Support for this case can be provided by
cross-reference to Thailand, which makes a useful
comparison both in terms of timing and the scale of their
fertility decline.   There, TFRs dropped from around six
births per woman in 1970 to just above replacement (2.2-2.3)
by 1987, even reaching as low as 3.1-3.2 in the strongly
pro-natalist Muslim southern region (Chayovan, Knodel &amp;
Kamnuasilpa 1988, Table 1).   Moreover, a cross-national
study on family size and structure in relation to fertility
regulation, in which New Zealand participated (noted above),
also included Thailand.   In Thailand, the results of that
study showed some of the same contradictions found among Maori
but not Pakeha, between the large families of older
generations, and the small family normative structures of
younger couples (Population Division, ESCAP 1986&semi; Knodel
  et al  . 1987, p.197).  
    Reference to Thailand has yet another value.   It
permits a 'case-control' study of fertility, as it were, for
Thais, in contrast to Maori,   'had never been subjected
to colonial rule...'   (C.Orange quoted in Legat 1990,
p.94).   Thus, by comparing the Maori and Thai fertility
decline one can 'control' for the effects of the colonial
implantation of alien values.   This indicates that a rapid
fertility decline can occur in the absence of interaction
and/or domination by a European colonial or majority
population.  
    In Thailand, a range of radical societal changes
affected demand for children: reduced child mortality&semi;
perceived rises in the cost of living and child-rearing&semi;
market penetration, monetisation and consumer aspirations&semi;
increased educational aspirations&semi; and a decline in the
contribution by children to household economic activities.
  These mainly socio-economic changes countered a cultural
value,   'a deeply entrenched sense and practice of
parent repayment...'  .   Like many cultural norms
this had both quantitative and qualitative dimensions (Knodel
  et al  . 1987, p.171).  
    While these points throw some light on the Maori
fertility decline, the comparison with Thailand is perhaps
most pertinent at the macro  -  societal level.
  Firstly, Thailand had a vigorous family-planning
programme (Knodel   et al.   1987, chapt.9), yet no
such mechanism was present in New Zealand.   Here, family
planning depends entirely on individual motivation and
follow-up, usually by couples deciding to employ
contraception/ sterilisation and then obtaining prescriptions
or services from a private fee-charging practitioner.   The
closest the government comes to encouraging family planning,
for either Maori or Pakeha, is through reduced prescription
charges.   Moreover, sterilisation is usually carried
out for a fee in a private hospital/ clinic because of long
public-institution waiting lists for surgery.   Beyond this,
  'Policy relating to the provision of contraception to
the young remains an area where conservative social attitudes
appear to exert a control'   (Sceats 1988b, p.384).
  Thus government can hardly be seen as mounting a concerted
programme of fertility control.  
    Indeed, the situation is even more paradoxical.
  While practising low fertility, both Maori and Pakeha
societies are pro-natalist, and most social policy instruments
directed equally at Maori and Pakeha support reproduction:
family benefits, housing assistance, Domestic Purposes
Benefits (for solo parents), negative tax termed 'Family
Support', and more generally the status accorded parenthood.
      'Thus there exist in New Zealand both a social
climate and a social welfare system which are supportive and
encouraging of childbearing'   (Sceats 1988b, p.405&semi;
detailed chapts. 11 &amp; 12).     The major socio-cultural
difference between Maori and Pakeha is the degree of emphasis
on family structure lineage and kinship as a central cultural
trait, as against the simple desire for children
(pro-natalism).   For Pakeha pro-natalist values are often
reinforced by a stated need for family continuity.
  This seems to be a different cultural norm from
whanautanga, but it could   'owe much to the increasing
interweaving of Polynesian values into the broader social
fabric of New Zealand'   (Sceats 1988b, p.389).  
    A third aspect of the Thai  'reproductive revolution'
is that   'The substantial reduction that has already
taken place has occurred in the absence of coercive measures
and without the need for introducing incentives or
disincentives into the family planning programme'  .
  As noted above, there is no record of incentives,
disincentives or coercion in New
Zealand    ,    .       If anything, the
incentives are in the opposite direction.   But as the case
of Thailand so clearly shows, such measures are unnecessary
where    'socio-economic change [has] helped
predispose the population toward fertility reduction and
continued to reinforce and strengthen the demand for
smaller families after the process got underway'  
(Knodel   et al.   1987, pp. 205 &amp; 204).  
    In sum, any fertility decline in New Zealand, Maori or
Pakeha, rather than being promoted by government, must be
achieved through the motivation and action of couples in the
face of some not inconsiderable obstacles.   Yet despite
all these constraints, the Maori 'fertility revolution' has
been among the most rapid anywhere, rivalling China 's.    
  

        7
  Old Ideas:
  The Ageing Society      
    But you 're not   really   old, we say to those
we know and love.   We mean, there is more to you than
wrinkles&semi; you 're far from tottering, mindless or dependent.
  Old is a label pinned more easily on strangers.
  Suggesting something more than mere chronological age,
phrases like 'over the hill' or 'past it' speak of loss of
youth and usefulness.   We see old people on the street -
but hardly see them at all.   For us, they have withdrawn to
the margins of life.   They are merely waiting to die.  
      Living longer    
    If they were it would, for most, be a long wait.
  The average 60-year-old Pakeha woman still has a quarter
of her life - or 21 years - ahead of her.   A Pakeha man has
another 17 years to look forward to.   The Maori figures are
lower - 16 years life expectancy for 60-year-old women, 13 for
men.   But Maori are catching up fast to Pakeha, and both
groups are living longer than they were several years ago.  
      Working less    
    One reason older people in this society tend to become
invisible is that, although they are living longer, they are
retiring from paid work earlier.   Retirement itself is a
recent invention - people used
  graph: Average Life Expectancy At 60 Years  
to work until they dropped.   The average age of retirement
has come down from the beginning of the century.   Then, 80
percent of men 65 and older were in paid work.   By 1986
almost 90 percent of men and nearly all women over 65 were out
of the paid workforce.   The number of 60-pluses with paid
work fell by a fifth between 1976 and 1986, even though there
were more people in that age group than ever before.  
    Now, even if they want to go on working, older people
are often made to feel they should move over for the young.
  We give them the message, implicitly if not explicitly,
that we do not want old men in swept-up offices, old women in
smart shops.   We are more comfortable when they go home
and do the gardening or take up bowls.  
    There is no fixed age at which people are expected to
leave paid work.   Retirement, voluntary or compulsory,
depends on how well people are, whether they want to keep on
working, and what interests they have to pursue at home.
  It depends, too, on what jobs are available, and whether
they can choose not to retire - in many organisations
retirement is compulsory.   Then there is the retiree 's
financial situation.   Many face the problem of what to live
on once they are no longer in paid employment.   Finally, as
we have seen, other people 's attitudes will have an impact
too.  
    Retirement does not mean the same for everyone.
  While women generally leave paid employment younger than
men, most women never retire at all because their major
responsibility for housework is never-ending.   Ironically,
this may be a good thing for women - it continues giving them
a sense of purpose while their male partners often face a life
made meaningless without paid work.  
    Maori and Pacific Islanders tend to retire earlier
than Pakeha, possibly because more of them are manual workers
and they do not enjoy such good health.  
    Self-employed people, such as farmers, professionals
and small business owners, were a quarter of the paid
workforce 60 or older in 1976, a third in 1986.   They tend
to go on working longer than wage and salary earners, probably
because their working conditions are more flexible.
  They can choose when to retire or cut down on their
working hours.  
    Retirement is a major event in anyone 's life, yet
surprisingly little is done to prepare people for the dramatic
change in lifestyle it heralds - in stark contrast to the way
we ready young people to go out to work.   Some financial
planning is probably all that many older people - those lucky
enough not to have to rely solely on a government benefit - do
in preparation for it.   Yet the new retiree must cope not
just with endless leisure and possibly a reduced income, but
also with all those community attitudes suggesting a person
who does not go out to work is on the scrapheap.  
      Older and fitter    
    Not only are people living longer and retiring
earlier, they are also fitter in their old age than ever
before.   About a third of 60 to 74-year-olds have some
impairment, but it is usually minor - the need for glasses or
a hearing aid - and it scarcely restricts their activities at
all.   Only four out of every 100 in this age group have a
severe handicap.   The incidence of this increases from 75
onwards but, even so, only 15 percent of very old people are
severely impaired.   What is even more surprising, given our
assumptions about old age, is that only six percent of those
over 65 live in institutions like hospitals or rest homes.
  Most are independent and stay that way until the end of
their lives.  
      Older and bolder    
    A good reason for amending our idea of old age is that
by early next century we will be living amongst more and more
of these fitter, independent, older people.   The numbers of
60-pluses increased by eight percent between 1981 and
1986, while the total population grew by only three percent.
  One in eight New Zealanders are now 60 or older.
  In 30   years'   time the baby boomers born in the
1950s and   '  60s will reach this age and, depending on
what happens to our birth rate, comprise about a quarter of
the population (see Chapter 8).  
  illustration    caption  
  illustration    caption  
    We could learn a lot from the status given to elderly
Maori - especially those who become kaumatua because of their
wisdom and mana.   We should be looking for ways to use
older people 's energy and experience, giving them access to
training and education, and making it easier for them to
contribute.   We cannot afford to push so many people with
so much to offer outside the mainstream of society.  
    The baby-boom elderly might change dramatically our
ideas of what it means to be old.   As generations age, they
carry with them values and preferences formed throughout their
lives by differing historical events and social eras.   In
the next few decades we will be seeing grannies who wore hippy
beads and flowers.   Behind them will come a wave of ageing
yuppies.   But even amongst their peers, no age group is
homogenous.   The elderly are as diverse in their needs,
lifestyles and personalities as any group of 30-year-olds.
  The age span from 60 to 90 covers more than one
generation, after all.  
    Not only is it in our own interests not to push older
people to the margins of life, we may find they will not let
us.   As a quarter of the population, the 60-pluses will be
in a strong position to dictate their own terms.   If we
refuse to change our attitudes, we may face a grey
revolution.  
  references  
        8
  The Bulge in the Boaconstrictor:
  Population Change      
    Thirty and 40 years ago the country was economically
and socially stable, and the population was growing faster
than it had since the 19th and early 20th centuries.  
    Many of our current decision-makers and power-brokers
grew up to take population growth for granted.   We made
sheepish jokes about the woolly population outnumbering the
human, but we were gaining more than 45,000 people a year.
  We talked of New Zealanders numbering five million by the
end of the century.  
    The fact is we are unlikely to reach even four million
by the year 2000, and we should no longer take population
growth for granted in our planning.   By the late 1970s, our
net gain had dropped to only 10,000 people a year.   Our
annual growth rate had gone from two percent to less than half
a percent.   Over the next 25 years, our population will
probably increase by less than one percent a year.  
    Between 1971 and 1986 New Zealand 's total population
increased by 16 percent, with Maori gaining a spectacular
40 percent.   Both figures are likely to drop.   The
overall rate of increase will be about 13 percent from 1986 up
to the year 2001, the Maori rate about 30 percent.   Maori,
who were 12 percent of the total population in 1986, will be
about 16 percent by then.  
    Two elements contribute to population growth (or
decline) - births and migration.   Birth rates have fallen
since the 1960s and are unlikely to climb again.   Migration
flows are rather less predictable.  
      Footloose New Zealanders    
    New Zealanders are becoming increasingly footloose.
  More and more fly in and out of New Zealand every year.
  Arrivals and departures trebled between 1970 and 1985.
  But it is a myth that New Zealand suffers a huge and
continuous outflow of migrants.   Year by year, the flow is
erratic.   Since 1980 it has changed direction several
times.   During 1983 we had a net gain of nearly 15,500
people.   In 1989 we lost nearly 19,000.   The most recent
figures show a balance in inflow and outflow.  
    Several factors lie behind these migrational swings.
  The baby boomers, born in large numbers in the 1950s and
1960s, are now of an age when people most want to experience
foreign life and travel.   Quite simply, New Zealand has
bred more potential travellers.   The economic situation
is also crucial.   New Zealanders leave home when the
economy slumps, and return in droves when it
  illustration    caption  
picks up.   About 200,000 Kiwis live in Australia alone and
they, unlike Pacific Islanders, Europeans and Asians, may
enter the country as of right whenever they wish.   The
number of New Zealanders who decide to come home cannot easily
be predicted.   So however finely tuned our immigration
policy, whether we fling open the door or only hold it ajar,
migration is likely to go on being something of an unknown
quantity in the population mix.  
      Smaller families, later motherhood    
    The intensely personal business of having a baby is
the population 's most crucial ingredient and, fortunately
for planners, also its most predictable.   Birth rates, or
fertility, have fallen since last century.   For many
reasons, women began to have fewer babies.   The
1930s  '   Depression low was an average 2.3 children per
woman.   The baby boom 25 or so years later temporarily
interrupted this trend towards smaller families - in 1961 the
average woman had 4.3 children.   But afterwards we
continued down the fertility slope into the 1970s and
1980s.  
    Since then our birth rate, like that of many developed
countries, has been below replacement level or just on it.
  Many couples are not producing enough children to replace
themselves.   To do so, women must have on average 2.1
children each.   In 1983 we were having only 1.9, and now
the average number of babies per woman is just over two.
  Pakeha women average 1.9 children, Maori women 2.2.
  But the fall in Maori fertility has been even more
dramatic - Maori women averaged more than six babies each in
1962.  
    This does not mean the population has stopped growing.
  Even without migrational gains, New Zealand 's population
will go on growing because births exceed deaths.
  Superficially, recent figures suggest a return to bigger
families - 50,000 births a year in the early 1980s, more than
55,000 in 1987, and 57,000 two years later.   But this is
another effect of the baby boom - the baby-boom echo.
  Those born in the peak birth-rate year 1961 are having
their 29th
  illustration    caption  
birthdays this year, and many are getting pregnant.   Even
if each individual woman has fewer children, there are enough
women having them to ensure a bumper crop of babies.  
    Another trend behind the recent upswing in the birth
rate is the decision many women, especially Pakeha, have made
to delay motherhood until their late 20s and 30s.   Maori
women are less likely to have children in their 30s, but fewer
teenagers, both Maori and Pakeha, are becoming mothers.
  Later motherhood, however, does not necessarily mean more
women will have more children&semi; on the contrary, it may mean
they have fewer because of leaving childbearing until later.
  The baby boomers will be followed into parenthood by a
much smaller group of people born in the 1970s, who will be
having babies 10 or 15 years from now.   So the recent
increase in the birth rate is unlikely to last beyond the
middle of this decade, and there is certainly no baby boom in
the 1950s sense.  
        The baby-boom bulge    
    The baby boomers have moved through New Zealand
society like the bulge in a boaconstrictor.   In the 1950s
and 1960s the bulge filled the maternity hospitals, then the
kindergartens and primary and secondary schools.   It
flooded onto the job market (just as unemployment struck),
perhaps travelled overseas, and is now settling down into
domesticity and childrearing.   Before it came a small
Depression-age generation, now in their 5Os, and after it will
come the   '  70s age group, the generation that was too
small to fill the primary schools opened for a swelling
population in the 1950s and 1960s.  
    It is another myth that our population is rapidly
ageing.   Our present median age is 30 - half of us are
older than that, the other half younger.   Between 1991 and
2001, only a small group of Depression-born babies will reach
retirement age.   Just over one in six of us is 60 or more.
  This age group grew by 20 percent between 1981 and 1991.
  It will grow only 14 percent in the following decade.  
  illustration    caption  
    A glance at the snake shows that the baby-boom
generation will not begin celebrating its 60th birthday until
about 2010 and later.   This is when the greying of New
Zealand will begin (see Chapter 7).   This is when the
pressure will come on to goods and services catering for older
people, and on to superannuation, or whatever type of income
support is then in place.  
    In the meantime, the small group of over 80s is
getting bigger.   They are living longer and requiring
medical and residential care, and services such as meals on
wheels.  
      Don't take growth for granted    
    Decision-makers should be concerned not so much with
how many people they must cater for, but who these people are,
and how the population is made up.   As the baby bulge, for
instance, has moved through its lifecycle, it has created
alternate expansions and contractions of demand for various
goods and services.   These can be anticipated and planned
for.   Primary school intakes can be predicted at least five
years ahead, with implications for the supply of teachers,
classrooms, crayons, readers and sticking plasters.   We can
also predict how many people will need jobs and training, how
many houses they will need, and how many elderly will need
looking after.  
    Population growth and contraction are not in the lap
of the gods.   While birth and migration are the result of
personal decisions made in private, the effect of these
decisions is public and well known.   We know more about
likely population trends than many other aspects of the
future.   They are there for decision-makers to use.  
  references      
  

        MATATA RAILWAY, ROADS AND BRIDGES
LEAGUE    
  by Walter Gibbons
    From the 1870s, when Vogel began his Public Works
Scheme, settler communities looked forward anxiously to the
time when roads, and more particularly railways, would provide
the promised internal communications.   Some had long to
wait, for New Zealand was not an easy land for engineers.
  Political pressures dictated the routes of many railways,
and also determined where branch lines, some of questionable
worth, were constructed.   The North Island Main Trunk line
had been completed in 1908.   That line passed through the
central part of the island generally along the line of the
Rangitikei and Waipa Rivers.   A branch line from Hamilton
to Rotorua had been completed and operating from 1894.   The
East Coast looked forward to a completed system which would
follow the route from Hamilton through Gisborne, Wairoa and
Napier to Woodville and thence to join the Main Trunk at
Palmerston North.   Other than the line to Rotorua the main
axis of the North Island system had by-passed the coast.  
    Such apparent neglect impelled small communities to
exert their own political pressure on Members of Parliament to
have the eastern route planned and constructed over its whole
distance without further delays.   These small communities
acted in conjunction with each other soliciting support from
near and far when it suited their purpose, but acting
independently when their own interests were threatened.
  Few groups even thought about the financial viability of
the railway they were asking for&semi; for them a rail connection
was a status symbol, and also a connection with an exotic
world which many had not even visited.  
    Engineers drew plans and governments gave effect to
them.   Often works were commenced to placate local
insistence.   So it was with the East Coast Railway.   To
provide a rail link from Hamilton to Gisborne was a task of
some magnitude and such was the distance that small sections
could be constructed long before the final route had been
determined.   It was a long haul from Morrinsville to
Paeroa, and the Karangahake Tunnel had to be driven to provide
access to the Bay of Plenty.   Because of insistence from
the goldfields this work was carried out by 1905.   Within
the Bay itself works were commenced at Waihi, and a further
section begun at Mt. Maunganui.   This latter section
reached towards Te Puke by 1913.   (1)  
  Construction was then pushed on towards Paengaroa.  
    Within the Eastern Bay of Plenty there was room for
apprehension.   After 1894 there was local talk of a railway
from Rotorua to Te Teko, the historic railway it was called by
1910, thence via the Waioho and Waimana to Opotiki.   Such a
line envisaged a branch line from Koroinui to Whakatane.  
    In June 1897 the Whakatane County  Council chairman
had tabled a letter of 26/5/1897 received by him from the
president of the East Coast Railway League in Gisborne
covering a report of that League.   The Council, after
discussion, resolved that it communicate with the Chambers of
Commerce at Auckland and Napier, and with Kelly MLC, and with
Davies and Carroll MHRs advocating the construction of a light
railway from Gisborne to Opotiki via Motu, and from Opotiki to
Rotorua via Te Teko, as against any other route.   It was
also decided that any information available be requested from
railway leagues at Gisborne and Wairoa.   (2)  
  Three years later the County Council resolved to write to
the Government asking that the Opotiki-Whakatane-Rotorua
railway be commenced at an early date.   (3)  
  People along the coast envisaged a railway from Paengaroa
back to the coast at Otamarakau, thence along the sea front to
Matata and along the sandhills to Whakatane thence by tunnel
to Ohope and across the Ohiwa harbour to Opotiki.   It would
then follow the Waioeka River to Matawai to meet the projected
construction from Gisborne northward.   Other variations
were proposed from time to time by planners and politicians.
  In the event the line of the railway from Matata to
Taneatua was not determined and surveyed until 1917, and
construction was halted at Taneatua in 1926.   The line from
Gisborne eventually reached Motuhora and did not proceed
beyond that point.  
    Matata and Opotiki had been the main ports in the
Eastern Bay for many years.   Whakatane was slow to emerge
as a viable centre for it suffered from the wars, the attitude
of the local Maoris, the swamps which surrounded it, and a
fickle harbour bar.   But when the Opouriao Estate was
subdivided in 1896, and the Orini closed off from the
Rangitaiki in 1901, a considerable area of fertile land gave
Whakatane the impetus it needed.   In addition the Whakatane
and Opotiki Counties were divided in 1899 and local body
politics were centred in Whakatane.  
    Efforts to drain the swamp by private means were
unsuccessful so in 1910 the government was persuaded to take
on the drainage work, the major initial task being the
diversion of the Rangitaiki River from Okorero direct to
  map: The proposed route of the East Coast Railway  
the sea.   Any interference with the flow of water at Matata
would seriously affect the use of harbour facilities at
Matata.   Matata was therefore facing a number of problems.
  It was by 1912 no means certain that they would have a
railway.   They wanted a hinterland for farming but to drain
the swamp would mean losing the water which brought shipping
to the harbour.   The Manawahe area had been recently opened
up for settlement but the road was merely a rough track, and
it would be some years before the bushfelling and timber
milling would give way to farming.   Access to Whakatane was
by ferry across the Rangitaiki and then by the sandhills track
to Whakatane.   Burt Bros. had established a dairy factory
in Matata itself but there was difficulty in getting the cream
supply to the factory, and in any case from 1912 their factory
had to compete with the new Tarawera Co-operative Dairy
Company 's factory at Otakiri.   Matata township had been
surveyed and laid out as the township of Richmond in 1868, but
since then the Maoris had cultivated the whole area except the
sea front road each year, and streets and sections were no
longer
  photo    caption  
locatable.   It was not easy to invite a population
there.  
    No doubt there was discussion from time to time
regarding the problems of the settlement.   If no other body
was going to help them then they would do so themselves.   A
meeting of settlers was called for 5 October 1912 at the
Matata Hotel.   It was a Saturday afternoon.   Mr W.B.
Ingram was appointed to chair the meeting, which decided to
form itself into a Railway, Roads and Bridges League.   The
subscription was fixed at 2s. 6d per annum per member.   The
stated purpose was to bring forward any matter pertaining to
the benefit, needs, and progress of the district and to
co-operate with other leagues.   (4)     Meeting
times were fixed for 1.30 p.m. on the fourth Saturday in each
month.   Since some of the members had to ride down from
Manawahe this was no doubt a wise decision.   The time also
coincided with the regular rugby matches.   Attending the
inaugural meeting were W.B. Ingram, W.E.L. Laugeson, T.
Parkinson, F. Burt Sen., Jackson, McLachlan, J. Fenton,
McQuarrie, Hannon and W. Lees.   Soon after his appointment
as Chairman W.B. Ingram found that the League conflicted with
his rugby interests.   W. McLachlan was then elected to the
chair in an acting capacity and in his absence T. Parkinson
chaired the meetings.   W.E.L Laugeson was elected Honorary
Secretary.   (5)      
    The first meeting decided that an application be made
to the Native Minister, through W.D.S. MacDonald, M.P., for
the section opposite the tennis court, containing about five
acres, as a recreation ground for Matata&semi; that area to be
invested in trustees.   The Minister of Railways and Public
Works was advised that the League resented the expending of so
much capital on the Tauranga and Gisborne ends of the East
Coast Railway while nothing had been done to create a junction
from Matata both north and south.   (6)     This
surely suggests that the League saw a branch line to Te Teko
from Matata, and not from Rotorua to Te Teko.   The League
went on to a decision to write to the Minister of Public Works
pointing out the delay in prosecuting work on the Rangitaiki
outlet.   The initial meeting concluded with the sending of
a petition to the Whakatane County Council asking for the
opening of the streets in Matata.   (7)    
    The second meeting was held on 26 October 1912.
  Ingram, who was not present wrote suggesting surveyors
should be sent to Pikowai.   The League, considering the
dilapidated state of the bridges on the Manawahe road, and the
road itself, wrote to the Roads Department to have the bridges
attended to and the bad bends on the road removed and
straightened as when opened to the Lakes the new road would
become a thoroughfare.   The Manawahe Settlers Association
was asked for its support.   An unnamed section (probably
Sections 103 and 104) was to be cut up and sold as smaller
sections if a petition was successful.   The Minister of
Public Works was to be advised that the League regretted that
nothing had been placed on the estimates for the
Matata-Taramurui, Matata-Otamarakau, Matata inland road to
Whakatane, and only &pound;50 for the Herepuru
North Road.   The Whakatane County Council was to be asked
to have the ferry charges revised and reduced in the County.
  The Council was to be asked to pay the Matata District a
visit&semi; for both these matters the support of the Manawahe
Settlers Association was solicited.   And lastly the
attention of the Noxious Weeds Inspector was to be drawn to
the sweet briar on the Matata roads.  
    It is not clear how closely the League 's activities
were conducted in association with the rugby season but the
next meeting was not held until 19 April 1913.   Immediately
the League asked the Minister of Public Works, through W.D.S.
MacDonald, to have the railway authorised from Paengaroa to
Matata during the session of Parliament then current.   Such
was the urgency that the League sought the co-operation of the
Whakatane Chamber of Commerce, the Manawahe Settlers
Association, the Tauranga Railway League, the Paengaroa
Progressive Association and the Waimana and Opotiki Leagues.
  The meeting went on to consider further issues.
  Members thought to ask the Minister for Native Affairs to
have Sections 103 and 104, containing 200 acres, taken by the
Government and put on the market in suitable areas.   This
land, they said, had been given to the Ngatirangitihi and
Tarawera tribes 20 years previously to work on and during that
time they had done practically nothing with the land, with the
result that by 1913 the only occupiers were two Europeans.
  W. D. S. MacDonald was complimented on putting his efforts
into pushing on with the Rangitaiki Outlet and the League
trusted in his "continuous" assistance until its completion.
  The Lands Department was asked to carry out and complete
the main drain on the west side of the Tarawera River,
starting at Matata.   R.H. Abbott had offered to carry out
this work with his dredge if a satisfactory price could be
arranged.   The League urged that remaining work be carried
out as soon as possible on the Manawahe-Rotorua road as it
would make a difference of 15 miles to Matata people in case
of accidents.   The Postmaster-General was urged to
establish telephone communication between Whakatane and Matata
and the surrounding district as Matata was at a great
disadvantage without such a service.   The Secretary was
directed to ascertain from W.D.S. MacDonald, M.P., when the
Prime Minister W.F. Massey would be paying a visit to the
district, as the settlers wished to take him through the
Manawahe road, either coming or going.   (8)    
    The meeting of May 1913 was almost entirely devoted to
hearing the replies to letters, which no doubt members would
have to consider.   The only new business was to advise the
Telegraph Department or Postmaster General that seven
subscribers were available towards the establishment of an
exchange at Matata, and to ask if the department would make a
connection for that number.   Following on from that
discussion it was decided to ask the Government to appoint the
postmistress as Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths for
Matata district, as there was an up-to-date Post Office in
Matata, and anyone at the time having to register had to
travel a return distance of thirty-six miles to do so.
  (9)    
    At the June meeting the Minister of Lands was written
to urging haste with the inland road from the Outlet to Matata
as the greatest portion of traffic came that way.   The same
Minister was asked to have two shifts put on at the Rangitaiki
Outlet to expedite the work.   And strangely, the Minister
was asked to have a special carriage placed on the railways
throughout the Dominion for the use and convenience of women
travelling with young children.   As yet the train was
distant from Matata&semi; one can only conjecture who thought that
one up, and who had had unfortunate experiences.
  (10)    
    A combined meeting, but of which organisations the
detail was not recorded, was held at Matata in July.   Some
events of import were no doubt discussed, but most likely it
was a final decision to take the railway along the coast, for
the resolution from the meeting to be wired to the Minister of
Public Works read   "that in view of the early opening
of the Railway to Te Puke and its extention to Paengaroa and
Matata eastwards it is essential that the government be urged
to place a sufficient sum on the estimates for the immediate
erection of a permanent wharf at the Mount"  .
  (11)    
    At the ordinary League meeting in July Mr Hallett was
appointed to act as delegate to the meetings to be held at
Whakatane and Opotiki&semi; the purpose of the meetings, and the
Associations represented were not specified.   The League
proceeded to write to the Manager of the Northern Steamship
Company asking that cargo for Matata be not allowed to
accumulate at Tauranga and that more regular and frequent
trips should be made to Matata.   The Chief Postmaster at
Thames was written to asking that papers be sent by the early
mail to Matata from Whakatane.   The Whakatane County
Council was asked to supply poison grain for the destruction
of small birds and to set aside a day for distribution of the
grain.   The offending little birds were not cited, but a
further resolution called for the Minister of Lands to have
quail declared a nuisance.   (12)    
    By August there was some elation at the turn of events
in the railway construction.   The League sent a letter to
the Hon. W. Fraser expressing its appreciation of the remarks
made by him re the East Coast Railway construction from the
Mount to Matata and onwards, and the League hoped that the
Minister would see his way to having a substantial vote placed
on the estimates for pushing on with the line.   A Crown
Lands Ranger had recently been to Matata to inspect Sections
103 and 104 so that League wrote to the Commissioner of Crown
Lands, as, they said, there were many waiting with expectation
to take up pieces of these sections.   The League 's request
was to know if the allotments were shortly to be advertised.
  (13)    
    Confirmation that the railway would indeed pass
through Matata no doubt relieved the League of considerable
worry and they were free to contemplate other issues,
including, it may be noted, the lukewarm responses to some of
their requests.   At the September meeting Cuff, Laugeson
and Parkinson were instructed to interview the manager of Loan
and Mercantile to see if the saleyards might be used as a
pound.   In anticipating a positive response, the League
proposed A. Parkinson as a suitable poundkeeper.   The
Herepuru Road was still not completed so the Minister of
Public Works was asked for a sufficient sum to be placed on
the estimates to have the work done.   A further application
was made to the Native Minister regarding Sections 103 and
104.   A sub-committee of Lees, Parkinson, Greig and Savage
was set up to investigate shipping matters and report at the
next meeting.   There must have been a few Matata residents
with a soft spot for the birds, for at the end of the meeting
the resolution declaring quail a nuisance was rescinded.
  (14)    
    No meeting was held in October or November 1913.
  There was a meeting in December, the last for which there
are minutes available.   A petition was sent to the
Government praying for a new dredge on the Tarawera River.
  The League decided to affiliate with the United Bay of
Plenty Railway League.   The meeting was informed by F. Burt
that the County Council had made arrangements about the pound
and A. Parkinson had refused to accept the position of
poundkeeper and had recommended Mr Homes [sic].   With
regard to shipping matters it was decided to call a special
meeting of all those interested and finally deal with the
correspondence now held by the League re shipping.   The
League wrote to the Hon. W. Fraser expressing their
appreciation of how the Minister had understood the
requirements of the district and in placing of a substantial
vote for the East Coast Railway   (15)  .  
    Since the League had joined the United Bay of Plenty
Railway League, the Matata meetings must have continued for
some time.   Correspondence addressed to the Matata League
in 1914 has survived.   However the 1912 and 1913 minutes,
and correspondence both outward and inward offer a window on
the small community at the time.   The effect of the
League 's activities outside of Matata was minimal.   Letters
to officialdom were always politely responded to in the style
of the period, the answer invariably containing the
information that the matter was under consideration, or was
being passed on to the appropriate office for comment.   Two
cases in point illustrate official attitudes: in regard to the
Postmistress being appointed a Registrar the Minister of
Internal Affairs replied through his Secretary that the matter
had been referred to the Registrar-General for report&semi;
  (16)   and with regard to the telephone line from
Whakatane the Assistant-Secretary of the General Post Office
replied that to provide the desired facilities it would be
necessary to erect a metallic circuit for the whole distance,
and the provision of that would be considered only if ten
persons undertook to become subscribers at Matata. 
  (17)     The impact of the League 's activities was
negligible, and in the event the decision about the route of
the railway would have been taken on other considerations than
the case put by Matata for Matata.   However the effect of
its existence was of more consequence in Matata itself where
the interests of the Europeans, scattered as they were in
location, were drawn closer together in defence of their young
settlement.   Exchange of views and discussion was an
element in social consciousness and cohesiveness.   There
appears to have been no Maori input in the League though, as
regards Sections 103 and 104 the League was advised by the
Department of Lands and Survey that the land in question was
Native Freehold but that the ownership had not yet been
determined by the Native Land Court.   That was as close as
the League got to Maori interests at that time.
  (18)    
    Correspondence with other Leagues and associations
where similar interests prevailed all went to establishing a
wider Bay of Plenty-East Coast feeling of having a common
cause.   If there had been a feeling of resentment towards
those who had a railway connection prior to 1912 the issue
over the route of the railway, and when it would be built
engendered a fierce determination in the coastal Bay of Plenty
not to be left behind in the development stakes.   The
Matata League was a reflection of what was afoot elsewhere.
  Each saw itself individually but called on the others
collectively to advance the cause.   In the event there were
few tears shed for those who were by-passed, as was Te
Teko.  
      Eighty years on it is interesting to focus on the
Matata Railway, Roads and Bridges League, for it came into
existence primarily to assert its claim for the railway,
indeed as a railway junction.   The gathering of malcontents
then soon discovered other shortcomings in their small
community which they sought to have the Government redress.
  All that could be pursued while they awaited the awful
hour of decision regarding the railway.   There was almost a
light-hearted sigh of relief and a turn to more trivial
difficulties after the Hon. W. Fraser communicated to them the
confirmation of the coastal route.   Their moment of
gratification came briefly, and went.   Te Teko, Opotiki and
Whakatane survived without the rail.   Matata got the
Rangitaiki Outlet to increase its hinterland, it achieved its
rail connection but lost its port.   The extent to which the
settlement subsequently capitalised on its good fortune
continues to be a matter for historical judgement after all
those eighty years.  
  references      
  

        THE PRIVATISATION OF SOCIAL ASPIRATION:
TRADE UNIONS IN NEW TIMES    
    Pat Walsh  
        Individual choice appears as a
neutral ideology, which everyone can ascribe to.   But it
has justified growing inequality, the collapse of social
cohesion and the abandonment of social responsibility.   It
is Thatcherism 's most fundamental and extensive
privatisation: the privatisation of social aspiration,
obligation and responsibility   ('Manifesto for New
Times',   Marxism Today  , September 1989).    
    If the privatisation of social aspiration, obligation
and responsibility is a defining feature of New Times, then
the future for trade unionism, at least as traditionally
understood, may be bleak.   The essence of trade unionism is
its collective character, premised upon the socialisation of
aspiration, obligation and responsibility.   Trade union
organisation works through the notion that there are common
interests widely shared among workers, who recognise this and
are prepared to act together to achieve their interests.
  Trade unions also recognise and try to reconcile divergent
interests among their members, but require members to accept
that their own particular interests may be compromised in
favour of those of other members whose needs may be greater,
or whose strategic position is more favourable.   Moreover,
unions also expect that members will at times be willing to
make sacrifices in support of the cause of other members.
  These collective and solidaristic principles, and the
assumption of common interests which underpin them, are
fundamentally at odds with New   Times'  
privatisation of social aspiration, obligation and
responsibility, and with their underlying principle of the
primacy of individual preference.  
    Trade unions have historically offered their members
uniform solutions to general problems.   For this version of
trade unionism to continue to be effective, workers must
continue to believe that on balance their interests are best
served by general solutions to the problems they meet at work.
  In a broad sense, unions must face up to two issues.
  The first is whether collective solutions are always or
even usually appropriate.   The second, less commonly
remarked upon but potentially more radical for unions, is the
degree to which problems are still collectively experienced
and defined.  
    Traditional (Old Times) trade unionism - uniform
solutions to general problems - prospered by responding
principally to the needs of a relatively homogeneous section
of its membership, whose personal circumstances and
occupational interests were fairly similar.   These union
members were male Pakeha, and were permanent full-time
workers, rewarded by length of service with the same employer
(pay, allowances, promotion, job security, and for some,
superannuation).   Their needs and interests tended to be
given higher priority in unions than those of others.   This
was partly due to the legacy of the late entry of other groups
into the unionised workforce.   Most female dominated
occupations, for instance, did not become unionised until
after the introduction of compulsory unionism in 1936,
whilst the numbers of Maori and Pacific Island people in the
unionised workforce grew rapidly after the second world war.
  As importantly, the relative priority given to certain
interests over others reflected the political dominance of
male Pakeha within trade unions and their control over
decision  -  making structures, which were themselves made
in their image.  
    Union membership in New Times is much more segmented.
  The composition of the unionised workforce and the terms
on which they are employed have changed considerably.
  Women, Maori and Pacific Island people make up a much
higher proportion of union membership than they did two or
three decades ago.   Union members, whether male or female,
are increasingly likely to have child-care
responsibilities.   More union members are employed on a
part-time or temporary basis, whilst a growing number are
outworkers or homeworkers, or on contract.  
    The segmentation of union membership has been
accompanied by parallel changes in the politics of trade
unionism.   The political dominance of male Pakeha within
particular unions has been challenged by increased activity by
women, Maori and Pacific Island people.   Traditionally
inactive, female-dominated unions, such as those representing
clerical workers, bank officers, cleaners and shop employees,
have become active for the first time and have vigorously and
successfully promoted non  -  traditional issues within
the wider trade union movement.   In addition, unions have
responded to general shifts in social attitudes and
conventions.  
    The more differentiated union membership becomes, the
more workers will tend to identify different issues as
requiring attention.   Women will give pay equity
higher priority than men&semi;   Maori will give tangihangi leave
higher priority than non-Maori&semi;   the Samoan hospital cleaner
who frequently acts as a translator for medical staff wants
recognition for language skills&semi;   parents will give child-care
and parental leave higher priority than non-parents&semi;   some
members may wish to change the normal hours of work and work
at ordinary time rates from much earlier in the morning to
give them the afternoon off, whilst others, in different
family circumstances or without access to personal or public
transport early in the morning, will oppose any change&semi;
  part-timers want better career prospects and the right to
remain a part-timer in senior positions&semi;   permanent workers may
give superannuation a high priority while temporary workers
want the best possible conditions right now.  
    These developments pose major problems for unions.
  Not only are their members more inclined to make different
judgements about solutions to problems, but increasingly they
identify different issues as problems.   And, the more open
and pluralistic union politics becomes, the more likely it is
that winning coalitions can be forged on a diversity of
issues.   Groups of members are now more likely than in the
past to engage in conflict with other groups about what
constitutes a legitimate problem for the union to allocate
resources to.   The   'privatisation of social
aspiration, obligation and responsibility'   means that
union members, like other groups in society, are less inclined
to accept a duty to promote the interests of others at the
expense of their own.  
    None of this is news of course to any union official
confronted with angry members demanding to know why the union
proposes to hold a hui or a women 's conference, to make a
financial donation to a particular group, to try to get an
improvement in one allowance rather than another, or to give
priority in award negotiations to extending annual or sick
leave provisions over a pay increase.   How do unions
service the increasingly diverse needs of a more segmented
membership, in a period of growing social and economic
distress and in circumstances in which industrially and
politically unions feel themselves on the defensive?
  Moreover, as we shall see below, management has been quick
to exploit this by claiming to workers that it can provide the
flexibility necessary to accommodate the diverse needs of
different groups of workers.   The dilemma for
under-resourced unions and for union officials facing already
impossible workloads is how to make the shift from Old Times
to New - from uniform solutions to general problems to
specialised solutions to particular problems - in a manner
which maintains the organisational cohesion of the union.  
    These issues also raise the important question of the
relationship between the union and its members.   Even to
pose the question in this way is partially to answer it, for
it implies a sense of separation between members and the union
hierarchy.   In the private sector, this separation was
encouraged by the historical development of trade unions in
New Zealand.   Crucial to it was their dependence on state
institutions of compulsory arbitration, compulsory membership,
award enforcement and monopoly jurisdiction, combined with the
Arbitration Court 's general wage adjustments.   This was
reinforced by statutory constraints on their structure,
operation and the membership services they could deliver.
  These factors contributed to a trade unionism in which
membership participation and membership servicing were neither
important nor encouraged.   Most state sector unions did not
enjoy the luxury of compulsory membership, but from the 1940s
onwards, their reliance upon fair relativity with the private
sector, enforced through compulsory arbitration, meant most
were not significantly different from their private sector
counterparts.   Not all unions fitted this model of course,
as Bollinger 's classic (1968) study of the Seamen 's Union
makes plain, but the number of significant exceptions was not
large.  
    As the institutional and wider social and economic
environment for unions changed, and the statutory protections
they previously enjoyed were stripped away, unions have been
forced to shift to a different model of organisation which
stresses reliance upon strategic location in the economy,
membership solidarity and commitment and effective
leadership and analysis at the centre (Brosnan, Smith, and
Walsh, 1990, ch.7).   In this model, membership
participation and servicing become vital lynch-pins of the
organisation, and unions cannot prosper where there is a
pervasive sense of separation between the membership and the
union hierarchy.  
    Unions in New Zealand have been gradually shifting
towards this model over the last two decades.   The
consolidation of   delegates'   structures in unions where
previously there were none, the reallocation of union
resources to the employment of organisers, especially at
regional level, the remarkable growth in the union education,
the very considerable expansion in the range of services
offered to members, the emergence of special
representational structures for women, Maori (less common) and
(still rare) Pacific Island people, the upsurge in different
forms of communication with members, and, in a number of
unions, significant constitutional and structural reforms have
all been part of this shift.   Ironically, but
unavoidably, these changes encourage the realisation and
expression of divergent views, as members involve themselves
in their union and begin to consider precisely what their
interests are.   The very process of change which unions
needed to undergo sets in motion developments which may
challenge the organisational cohesion of the union.    
    The shift by unions to a participatory organisational
model oriented to servicing the diverse interests of a
segmented membership, has been hindered by two sets of
factors.   One is the legacy of the past - the
understandable persistence of the earlier orientation in the
attitudes and actions of both officials and members.   Until
very recently, improvements in pay and conditions for most
workers dropped out of the sky as a result of a process which
they had very little to do with (Campbell and Kirk, 1983).
  Improvements came either from some deal between the
Government and the central organisations of unions and
employers, from Government directly, or as a relativity
flow-on from gains won through industrial struggle by other
groups of workers.   In the latter process, workers at all
levels throughout the economy (including those covered by the
Higher Salaries Commission, such as MPs) depended upon the
vigour and commitment of the particular union, usually the
engineers or the drivers, cast in the role of leading the
award round for that year.   Other unions only infrequently
required their own members to emulate their counterparts in
the lead union.   Most workers came to expect improved
working conditions to emerge out of a process mediated by
their union, but which did not involve them in significant
industrial struggle.  
    These attitudes live on in the widespread expectation
that union members have over particular issues that the union
should  'do something'.   However, those members do not
expect that they will have to strike to achieve their
objective.   It is assumed that, as in the past, the union
can  'do something' independently of the loyalty and commitment
of union members.   Beneath this is a mistaken perception of
the union as something separate from its members with
resources and capacities of its own.   On the other side,
some union officials, accustomed to the comfortable ways of
the past, and uneasy with an active role for the membership,
which they see as potentially threatening and disruptive, work
to prevent the shift to more participatory structures.
  They too see the union as something separate from the
membership, and acquire a proprietorial attitude towards the
organisation.  
    An unintended by-product of the shift to a service
orientation is that it may encourage the very sense of
separation which it is designed to overcome.   The more that
unions offer their members a smorgasbord of services, the more
the members may come to take a detached view of the union as a
service organisation to which they pay a fee and from which
they expect to receive various benefits, including improved
employment conditions, without needing to struggle for these
gains themselves.   This belief that consumer or client
needs can be satisfied by payment of the appropriate fee is a
typical characteristic of New Times.   Its emergence among
union members, a product of seemingly necessary organisational
shifts by unions to accommodate New Times, may ultimately be
inimical to traditional patterns of trade union organisation
and activity.   This is of course not necessarily a major
problem for unions, which are able to adapt organisationally,
but it is important that unions consider the possible
implications of their shift to a service orientation.  
    Other considerations making it difficult for unions to
shift to an organisational model appropriate to New Times are
factors central to New Times itself.   The increasing
globalisation of economic activity and the dominance of
economic production by large transnationals pose major
problems for trade unions trying to manage change and respond
effectively to membership demands (Enderwick, 1989).
  Unions are unable to match the vast resources of the
transnationals, and have difficulty competing effectively
with them in the domestic industrial relations context.
  Secondly, the transnational companies, if faced by
resistant workers, are often able and willing to shift their
operations to compliant workforces in different regions,
countries or even continents.   Trade unions in New Zealand
have faced this problem in footwear, clothing and in other
industries which prospered under now discarded policies of
import protection.  
    Trade unions typically have developed as domestic
organisations.   They find it very difficult to organise
internationally or even to coordinate among national union
movements.   Workers benefiting from the transfer of
production to their country are unlikely to support workers in
another country who have lost their jobs.   Moreover, the
new workforce has been selected precisely because of its
industrial docility.   The dominance of transnationals also
places great competitive pressures upon domestic producers,
and contributes to a harsher environment for their workers
also.   The economic recession of the 1980s heightened
worker vulnerability and placed unions firmly on the
defensive.  
    These circumstances gave rise to important changes in
the structure and operation of management.   As
international and domestic economic activity become much more
competitive, cost-conscious firms responded with policies
designed to reduce costs and gain competitive advantage.
  This has seen the emergence of what initially became known
in the industrial relations literature as strategic management
(Kochan, Katz, and McKersie, 1986), but which later became
more widely identified as human resource management.   A key
objective of human resource management is to weaken the
organisational base for unions among workers.   Indeed
internationally, many human resource managers aim for a
union-free environment, and they pursue this with varying
strategies depending on the particular legislative, industrial
and political circumstances they find themselves in.
  During the 1980s, firms tended to find these circumstances
favourable to their interests, as right-wing governments did
away with traditional legislative protections unions had
enjoyed, whilst replacing them with new restrictions on trade
union freedom of action, and dismantled or ran down the state
agencies responsible for the regulation or enforcement of
employment conditions, including occupational health and
safety.   In New Zealand, a curious mix of government
policies prevailed, some of which strengthened union
organisation, whilst others undermined it in significant
ways.  
    An important element of those strategies has been the
reassertion of managerial control and a corresponding
diminution in union power.   In New Zealand, this strategy
has been most prominent in some of the new state-owned
enterprises (Walsh, 1988).   It has also been an important
component of the new approach to public sector management in
the core state sector, and has been followed in many private
sector companies also.  
    A key aspect, and one central to New Times, is the
appeal management makes to workers as individuals and the
promise of individual satisfaction.   Increasingly, managers
seek to cultivate individual loyalty and create new bonds
between employees and the firm.   Workers are encouraged to
believe that their interests coincide with those of the firm
or organisation, and that senior management will ensure that
those interests are met.   Central to this strategy is the
effort by managers to establish a new relationship with their
employees which does not involve the union.   Thus human
resource managers try to deal directly with employees,
by-passing and undermining the union.   Managers seek to
convince workers that all the benefits of unionisation and
collective bargaining can be provided by the employer, without
the difficulties that come with union membership and
industrial activity.   In this strategy, they are aided by
the very difficulties that unions have in coping with the new
diversity of membership interests.   Managers try to
capitalise on the privatisation of social aspiration.
  Where there is membership dissatisfaction with union
policy or practice, managers hold out the hope that the point
at issue can be remedied through management rather than the
union.  
    Thus, in the SOEs and in the core state sector, there
has been a great emphasis upon removing managerial-level
employees from the coverage of their collective agreement and
placing them upon individual contracts of employment.   It
is argued that employees can have employment conditions
tailored specifically to their individual needs which could
not be met through the collective agreement.   Individual
contracts are also seen as a way of creating and sustaining
organisational hierarchies by developing a  'management
culture' in which the authority of management is reinforced
over lower-level employees.   The placing of employees at a
point within a range of pay rates, based upon job evaluation
and managerial assessment of performance, rather than
automatic progression up the steps on a scale, directly ties
  employees'   personal rewards to their relationship with
management.   It encourages the notion that assessment and
rewards are now objective, and that a competent individual
will progress satisfactorily without needing to rely upon
their union to protect them.  
    At lower levels, union strength is challenged by the
shift to post-Fordist technologies.   This grew out of the
harshly competitive nature of economic activity and out of
related changes in consumer preferences.   No longer could
firms compete on price alone.   Demand for standardised
products at the lowest price was replaced by an increasingly
differentiated market demanding specialised high-quality
products.   The need to meet these demands required new
technology.   It is argued that flexible specialisation
eclipsed mass production and reordered traditional systems of
work organisation upon which unions had patterned their own
organisation and activity (Piore and Sabel, 1984).  
    In this argument, employers seek to make effective
union organisation more difficult by establishing the
'flexible firm'.   Flexibility has both a functional and a
numerical component.   Multi-skilling, quality circles, team
briefings, consultative committees, performance pay again,
financial participation and other aspects of functional
flexibility, all of which grew up around post-Fordist
technology, speak to a radically different way of organising
social relations at work.   These changes, although made
possible by technological advances, have been encouraged by
human resource managers as a means of establishing new
loyalties between workers and management and undermining
loyalty and commitment to the union.   At this level,
managers seek to create new group loyalties to replace the
more traditional and more threatening identification with the
whole workforce, and tie those loyalties to the organisation
rather than the union.   By numerical flexibility, employers
also seek to divide the workforce and weaken trade unionism by
establishing a sharp distinction between the core workforce of
permanent full-time employees and the periphery - workers
employed on a part-time or temporary basis or on contract or
as outworkers.   Advocates of the 'flexible firm' thesis see
this form of organisation rapidly replacing the traditional
hierarchical organisational structure previously favoured by
capitalist firms.  
    These concerns about the implications of New Times for
trade unions tie in with a longer-standing sense of trade
unionism in crisis.   This first became a matter of debate
in the United States in the early 1980s, and has extended to
varying degrees to most OECD countries.   These concerns
were initially prompted by developments which preceded
subsequent theorising about New Times.   However, many of
these are now seen to be important elements of New Times.
  Some have been discussed here, whilst others, including
the growth of sub-contracting and temporary and part-time
work, reinforce the unwelcome trends for unions.   This
brief paper has been able to raise only some of the issues
that need to be addressed in assessing the implications New
Times pose for collectivities of workers organised around
common interests in their terms and conditions of
employment.  
    However, a final note of caution, or more precisely
optimism, should be sounded.   These developments are trends
which require careful examination, not least because they tie
in with particular ideas being advanced by powerful groups on
the right.   But, as recent studies are showing, there has
not yet been radical change in employment relations.
  Pollert 's (1988) re-examination of the data for the United
Kingdom offers little support for the more sweeping of the
claims associated with the flexible firm thesis.   Movement
towards functional flexibility has been limited, while most
changes in what are claimed to be the dimensions of numerical
flexibility are better explained by overall shifts in
employment (the decline of manufacturing and the expansion of
the service sector) than by new management policies.   Only
in the public sector has there been significant movement
towards numerical flexibility, a movement Pollert explains
largely in terms of ideology (sub-contracting of activity to
the private sector) or mistaken beliefs about what the private
sector actually does.  
    These reassessments should encourage unions to focus
their attention upon what has actually happened, and what
might reasonably be expected to happen in the medium-term
future.   They will find enough there to concentrate their
minds, without being agitated by the more apocalyptic visions
of the totally flexible workforce.   There are sound reasons
for firms to prefer a coordinated hierarchical structure with
clear control systems - the same reasons which led the large
    transationals    transnationals     to
introduce them in the first place (Chandler, 1977&semi; Williamson,
1975).  
      Reappraisals of trade unionism in OECD countries
in the 1980s do not support a picture of uniform decline
(Rojot, 1989).   In some countries, unions have in fact done
well, despite similar economic conditions as those in other
countries where unions did less well.   Indeed, in the
United Kingdom, where conditions appear to have been least
favourable to unions, the most recent judgements are that
unions coped with the 1980s far better than they coped with
the 1930s, and that they may have emerged from the decade in
better shape organisationally than at the start (McInnes,
1987).   It is important then to specify the circumstances
which contribute to union decline and otherwise, and in
particular, as with assessments of the flexibility thesis, to
distinguish between cyclical and long-term factors.   Much
of the observable decline in union membership in many
countries appears to have resulted from unemployment rather
than worker rejection of unions (Kelly, 1988).  
    For unions, New Times also opens opportunities.
  New participatory attitudes among the membership and in
the wider society create pressures for forms of industrial
democracy, whilst at the same time making members available as
a key resource for unions on a more consistent and reliable
basis than before.   Any significant shift away from
traditional Taylorist production systems towards processes
based on teamwork and multi-skilling makes worker cooperation
more important than in the past.   As Jones and Rose
(1986:57) put it, in their study of work reorganisation,
should unions wait for the right economic conditions for
traditional forms of militancy to return, or should they
    try to widen the loopholes created by
management 's apparent need for some co-determination of
plant-level and production issues and build upon the limited
but concrete gains of some 'pragmatic' shop-floor unionists?
  The danger for unions is that the latter development may,
if ignored or simply dismissed, take off on a course of its
own which they may be unable to influence in
future.      
    Moreover, there are limits to the privatisation of
social aspiration.   The same economic pressures which gave
rise to the development of human resource management, also
lead to employer pressure to worsen employment conditions and
to enhance worker insecurity and vulnerability.   These are
the traditional bases of union organisation.   As employers
press for 'flexibility' over pay and conditions, workers,
threatened by the prospective loss of basic rights and
protections, become prime material for union organising
drives.   Recent examples in New Zealand, such as in the
health sector (Walsh and Fougere, 1989), show that some unions
are in a position to capitalise on this.   Other examples,
including the non-renewal of several key awards in 1989 show
that not all unions are able to do so.   Since one major
union fits into both those categories, it is evident that
union organisation itself is not the only consideration in
shaping outcomes.   Employer structure, ideology and
strategy and the composition, distribution and attitudes of
union membership are as, if not more, important.
  Successful union resistance to employer attempts to
establish a new relationship with their employees will depend
on union   members'   willingness to mobilise against the
loss of employment conditions.   Even in New Times, some
things don't change.    references       

    Sealing  
    In 1868 Hatch bought the 17 ton schooner Nancy, which
had been built in Port Adelaide in 1865.   He also fitted
out several cutters all intended for sealing.   It involved
capital input in owning a suitable vessel but the returns
could be very remunerative.   The costs of operating a
vessel were not great and included the salary of a captain,
and the maintenance of hull, sails and rigging.   If the
winds were kind the replacement of sails and rigging was not a
big expense and the driving force, the wind was free.   Crew
were engaged on lays or shares and were paid by results.   A
good season provided an appropriate return to owner and crew.
  In a poor season the crew took their share of the losses
with the owner.  
    In 1872 the Nancy made a voyage to the Auckland
Islands, returning with 150 skins and 3/4 tons of oil.   In
the following year a similar voyage produced 400 skins.
  Soon after this voyage the Nancy was lost when leaving the
New River on another sealing expedition.   In October 1873
Hatch purchased the 45 ton fore and aft rigged schooner
Awarua.   The Awarua was 58 feet in length and had been
built in Bluff in 1871 by the well-known ship builder C. E.
Price.   There is little record of the activities of the
Awarua in the rest of the decade.   In 1873 the government,
in an effort to save the species from extinction, introduced
closed periods for sealing.   This would have been
frustrating to Hatch who with his new and larger vessel was in
a better position to explore the islands of the Southern
Ocean, the area more likely to produce results than the coasts
on the mainland.   However, closed seasons did not mean much
to the unscrupulous.   Once a vessel left port it was
unlikely to be heard of again until it returned.   The
oceans were wide and the government had only one small sailing
vessel, the Kekeno, policing the sealing regulations.   That
Joseph Hatch was not averse to a little poaching can be judged
from the prosecution of Captain Drew of the Awarua in February
1880 for sealing out of season.   Fortunately for Drew and
probably Hatch, the prosecution failed because of a
technicality.  
    In 1886 Hatch spent some &pound;650
preparing the Awarua for sealing and as he was a member of the
House of Representatives it is reasonable to assume he had
some indication of government policy.   If he was given the
nod, it turned out to be wrong, for in April the government
extended the closed season for a further year.    
    Late in the year the Awarua, as a result of
representations made to the government by the Invercargill
Chamber of Commerce, sailed to the Auckland Islands to report
on the seal population and related matters.   The report
indicated little increase in the seal population and in view
of the scarcity there was little point in providing
protection.   In April 1887 the government extended the
closed season for sealing a further year.   Following this
announcement, Hatch announced his intention to despatch
the Awarua to Bass Strait, where no sealing restrictions
existed.   A sealing gang of Maoris and half-castes under
George Howell as headsman was recruited.   The names of the
party were Tommy Fat, Denis Fox, Mabelle Wood, Charles Brown,
Te Kooti and one Murphy.   Denis Fox was to enter Hatch 's
life on several occasions and always with serious
repercussions.   The Awarua sailed on the 22nd of June 1887.
  Hatch 's announcement that the Awarua was to seal in Bass
Strait was viewed with some cynicism and derision by some of
the locals, who, knowing Hatch considered it more likely its
destination was the Southern Oceans, a much more likely area.
  That this suspicion was held by other than locals, is
illustrated by the Marine Department advising their
counterpart in Hobart of the Awarua 's departure.   They were
asked to report her presence     "as it was
considered advisable to ascertain her movement as Seal
Fishery in this colony is closed at present."      
    The Awarua first called at Riverton and finally
cleared Stewart Island on the 6th of July and four days later
sailed into Port Ross in the Auckland
    Island    Islands     having gone in the
completely opposite direction to their announced destination.
  Their arrival at such a remote place would probably not
have come under notice in normal circumstances but to their
surprise they were greeted on arrival by eight survivors of
the barque Derry Castle.   The Derry Castle survivors had
been on the island some three months and were jubilant at
being found.   Their jubilation would not have been shared
by Captain Drew of the Awarua.   To him the castaways were
an acute embarrassment and one he could not walk away
from.  
    The Derry Castle had sailed from Geelong, Victoria on
the 13th of March 1887 with a cargo of wheat for Falmouth.
  One week out in thick, stormy weather the ship struck a
reef off Enderby Island at the north eastern extremity of the
Auckland Islands.   The ship quickly broke up and all aboard
were either washed overboard or threw themselves into the sea.
  With daylight the survivors, seven crew and one passenger
found themselves on a remote, desolate island with little
clothing, no food and no fire.   Their first task was to
bury the bodies of their shipmates who had been washed ashore.
  The survivors were on a small island close to the entrance
to Port Ross.   Clearly visible on the mainland was the
building, housing the depot maintained for shipwrecked
sailors.   It was a tantalizing prospect but the survivors
had no means of crossing the comparatively short stretch of
sea intervening.  
    It was possible to contrive some crude shelter and
food in the form of shellfish etc was available, but survival
in the harsh climate and the circumstances they found
themselves in was impossible without fire.   Great hopes
were pinned on a box of matches which was found.   They were
carefully dried but hopes sank as one by one they refused to
light.   When all seemed lost, James McGhie, the passenger,
found a revolver cartridge in his pocket and after much
careful preparation a fire was lit by exploding the powder it
contained.   With fire the eight managed a miserable
existence but there was no prospect of reaching the depot
until some thirteen weeks after the wreck an old axehead was
found.  
    Port Ross had been the site of Enderby 's &amp; Co 's
settlement which was formed by the arrival of three hundred
people in December 1849.   Their leader, Mr Charles Enderby,
was appointed Resident Commissioner and his importance was
added to by being appointed Lieutenant Governor by the
British government.   Buildings were erected to house
the colony and the settlement was named Hardwicke.   Life in
the Auckland Islands was hard and the experiment was a dismal
failure.   By 1852 the colony had been abandoned.   It was
to this experiment in colonization that the Derry Castle
survivors could thank for the axehead, which in turn enabled
them to fashion a crude punt to cross the straits to reach the
depot.   This they accomplished on the 18th of June 1887
where they found the luxuries of a building, a boat, clothing,
blankets, some food and cooking utensils, axes, matches and
fishing lines.   After life on Enderby Island living at the
depot on the mainland was equivalent to a holiday at Club
Med.  
    For Captain Drew it was one thing to have the
tremendous satisfaction of rescuing fellow seamen in distress
and another to have a costly and risky poaching expedition
ruined.   He could have immediately returned to New Zealand
with the survivors and this would seem to have been the safest
option.   Instead, he decided to go on with the sealing
venture and the Derry Castle survivors, who had little option,
agreed to assist.  
    The sealing was not very successful.   Finally
Captain Drew decided to give up and  , obviously with a
view to covering his tracks, headed for Melbourne where the
Awarua arrived in late September.   The arrival was the
first indication of the loss of the Derry Castle.   This
together with rescue of the eight survivors was big news.
  Captain Drew and his crew were treated as heroes and a
relief fund was immediately established.   In a short time
the public subscribed &pound;223.15.0 which was
matched by &pound;150.0.0 by the government.   In
October it was decided to distribute the amount in the
following way:
  table    
    Passenger McGhie was, for some reason, not included in
the distribution.   About the same time, the Victorian
Customs advised the New Zealand authorities that 176 seal
skins had been found on the Awarua.  
    The news of the arrival of the Awarua at Melbourne was
received in Invercargill on the 22nd of September 1887 just
twenty four hours before Joseph Hatch was to make his last
speech before the election in which he was seeking a further
term in parliament.   His final meeting with an attendance
of over 1 000 people was a disaster, with continual uproar,
interjections and questions about the activities of the Awarua
which could not be adequately answered.   Almost certainly
the news of the Awarua cost him the election.   There had
been some talk when the Awarua left on a sealing expedition
during the closed season in New Zealand and the news that the
vessel had rescued castaways at the Auckland Islands when it
was due to operate in Bass Strait was too much to swallow.
  The lame excuses of strong northerly weather and having to
pick up a boat at Port Ross were not accepted.   Much to his
disappointment Hatch was third out of five candidates.   The
results were:
  table    
    Hatch showed his frustration and disappointment at the
official declaration of the poll when in his address, instead
of the traditional acceptance of a democratic election, he set
out to blame his defeat on the Returning Officer, Mr A. C.
Henderson.   It was a cowardly attack on an official who was
not in the position to reply.   In a typically long tirade
Hatch indicated that the electors had voted fair and square
but not so as far as the Returning Officer was concerned -
    "he was no more fit for the position as a dog in
the street."       As Hatch had thrown doubts on
the impartiality of the Returning Officer, Henderson took a
case against him for slander, claiming damages of
&pound;1000.   The case was heard before the end
of the year by Mr Justice Ward and a special jury.   It
attracted tremendous interest.   That Hatch took the case
seriously is shown by his choice of Sir Robert Stout as his
counsel.   Sir Robert, a fellow prohibitionist, was a former
Prime Minister and a future Chief Justice.   He was probably
the most prominent barrister in the country.   Despite the
skill of Sir Robert and the calling of some twelve witnesses
the jury took a mere twenty minutes to decide that Hatch 's
words were said with malicious intent.   They awarded
Henderson &pound;50 damages with costs making
Hatch 's outburst extremely expensive.  
    Early in December 1887 the Awarua returned to Bluff
and shortly after Lewis Frederick Drew, Master, and Denis Fox,
Mate, were brought before the court charged with killing seals
in a closed season and having 176 seal skins in their
possession.   The case was heard by Mr H. McCulloch,
Resident Magistrate and Mr J. L. McDonald J. P.   Fox was
charged with the offences and Drew charged with being an
accessory.   Fox said in court that Hatch and Drew had
profited by the rescue of the Derry Castle survivors because
of the award from the relief fund, whereas he had not, and it
was unfair he was charged as the principal offender.   Hatch
in evidence said he found the vessel and food and paid the
master &pound;10 per month, the profit on skins
obtained to be divided in agreed proportions between owner and
crew.   He had given specific instructions to the master to
seal in Bass Strait and not to breach the closed season in New
Zealand territory.   Drew in evidence confirmed Hatch 's
instructions.   Both men were convicted with Fox being fined
&pound;5 for killing one seal and Drew fined
&pound;40 for being an accessory and
&pound;10 for seals killed.   Though Drew had
received exactly the amount he was fined from the relief fund,
he chose to serve a sentence of six months rather than pay the
fine.   Whatever the reason for Drew 's choice his case
aroused public sympathy resulting in a petition to the
government to have his sentence reduced.   Hatch on the
other hand was considered the villain of the piece and treated
accordingly.  
    That he had been unfair to Drew was illustrated in
June 1888 when Drew, recently released from gaol, took a case
against Hatch for unpaid wages.   The claim was for
&pound;54.7.8, Hatch counterclaiming
&pound;117.16.6 for goods supplied, cash lent and
moneys paid.   The Magistrate Mr H. McCulloch found that the
wages claimed were due but that despite some very conflicting
and unreliable evidence on the part of Hatch, that the
counterclaim must succeed to the extent of
&pound;41.13.4.   Judgement for Drew for
&pound;12.13.4 and costs &pound;2.1.0
was given.  
    After the court case Hatch resorted to his great
standby of a public meeting to defend his actions.   Hatch
hired Sloan 's Theatre and issued an invitation to the public
to hear his side of a controversy which had kept tongues
wagging in Invercargill for almost a year.   Some 1500
accepted the invitation.  
    Getting a chairman was a problem, the Mayor declining
as he did not consider the meeting an ordinary public one.
  Several names were suggested but they were either
unwilling or not acceptable to Mr. Hatch.   Eventually Mr N.
Johnson was nominated and accepted.  
    Mr Hatch thereupon launched into a long address giving
his side of the voyage of the Awarua and the subsequent events
using his     elequence    eloquence     to defend
the indefensible.   During his address Hatch was frequently
interrupted and contradicted by Captain Drew and others, while
at intervals the audience loudly and emphatically expressed
their disbelief of his explanations.   At the conclusion of
the address it was moved and seconded from the floor that
    "In the opinion of this meeting Mr Hatch 's
explanations are not satisfactory and it is the duty of
the government to take proceedings against him for seal
poaching and perjury."       The chairman duly put
the motion but the voices were so nearly equal he was unable
to decide the issue.   On asking for a show of hands he
declared the motion, lost.   The declaration was received
with mingled applause and dissent.   When Hatch came forward
to propose a vote of thanks to the chairman, he was received
with hooting and noise.  
    Consideration was given to charging Hatch with perjury
but as Captain Drew, even after his quarrel with Hatch, still
agreed he had not been instructed to go to the Aucklands, no
case could be made.  
      Later in the year Hatch was again in trouble over
seal skins.   The Awarua arrived at Bluff with 78 skins on
board which Hatch maintained were obtained from Bass Strait.
  The customs pointed out that under the Fisheries Act of
1884 all skins were treated as being illegally taken unless it
could be proved to the contrary.   The vessel was held by
the Customs until Hatch could prove the origin of the skins
and he was permitted to land them only on payment of the
expenses in seizing them.   The following month Hatch must
have convinced Customs as the amount charged was
refunded.      
  

        HISTORY    
      Discovery    
    The first of the five island groups to be discovered
by Europeans was the Bounty Islands, by Captain William Bligh
of the mutiny on the   Bounty   fame.   On 9 September
1788, he came across   "a cluster of small rocky
islands"   which he named   "after the ship, the
  Bounty Isles  "  .   Then on 23 November 1791,
unbeknown to each other, Captain George Vancouver of   the
Discovery   and Lieutenant Broughton of the
  Chatham   discovered The Snares on the same day.  
    On 26 March 1800, Captain Waterhouse of the
  Reliance   sighted a group of islands, which because
of their approximation to the antipodes of London, he named
the "Penantipodes".  
    The Auckland Islands, which like the other islands may
have been known to early Maori, were not discovered by
Europeans until 1806.   On 18 August that year, Captain
Abraham Bristow of the whaler   Ocean   sighted a group
of islands which he named   "Lord Auckland 's (my friend
through my father)"  .  
    The last of the five island groups, Campbell Island,
was discovered on 4 January 1810, by Captain Frederick
Hasselburgh of the sealer   Perseverance   who named it
after Robert Campbell, the owner of his sealing company.
  Sadly Hasselburgh drowned in Perseverance Harbour, and by
an extraordinary coincidence 19 years later the
  Perseverance   itself was wrecked in the same
harbour.  
    Following their discovery there was a rush of sealers
to these subantarctic islands.   With the wholesale
slaughter of seals the sealers soon all but exterminated their
means of livelihood.  
      Antarctic Explorers    
    During the year 1840, three famous Antarctic explorers
were to anchor in Port Ross in the Auckland Islands.   First
to arrive was the American Charles Wilkes in the
  Porpoise  .   He found the harbour an excellent one
to replenish his wood and water, while his crew
  "enjoyed themselves on chowders and
fries"  .  
    Only two days after Wilkes, the French expedition
under Dumont D'Urville entered the harbour in the
  Astrolabe   and   Zelee  .   Interestingly
D'Urville found the graves of some early whalers on Shoe
Island in the harbour and his artist Breton leaves us a fine
painting of the island with the two ships anchored
alongside.  
    But by far the most significant of the three
expeditions was the visit of the English naval vessels HMS
  Erebus   and HMS   Terror   under the command of
Captain James Ross (later Sir James).   On board were the
two botanists Joseph (later Sir Joseph) Hooker and Dr David
Lyall who collected 80 flowering plants, including the
magnificent megaherbs and many species that had never been
described before.   Later, he was to publish the collection
in his classic   Flora Antarctica.      
  photo  
  caption  
    Impressed by what later became known as Port Ross,
James Ross carried out a hydrographic survey of the harbour.
  Then before departing he released several animals,
including sheep, pigs, poultry and rabbits, and also planted a
variety of vegetables and garden fruits as food for
castaways.  
      Hardwicke    
    Fired by James Ross 's report of an excellent harbour
at Port Ross and that it would serve as an ideal whaling base
for the whole southern region, Charles Enderby of the British
whaling company, Samuel Enderby &amp; Son, determined to found a
whaling settlement at Port Ross.   In doing so he unwisely
accepted, without question, the glowing account of Benjamin
Morrell who following a visit in 1829, reported that the
  "Auckland 's Island is one of the finest places for a
settlement.     There are very few spots that could not be
converted to excellent pasturage or tillage land  "  .
  Without bothering to check for himself the gullible
Enderby went ahead with his plans to found a settlement at
Erebus Cove, Port Ross.     "The Auckland Islands are
exceedingly healthy"  , he enthused in his prospectus,
  "and have a very rich virgin soil"  .
    "  The settler will be free from aboriginals,
there being none on the island."      
    We can imagine the surprise of the settlers when they
arrived in Port Ross in December 1849 to find over sixty Maori
and Moriori already occupying the land.   The Maori-Moriori
party under Chief Matioro had arrived from the Chatham Islands
in 1842, a whole eight years previously.   If the truth be
known the Maori probably were pleased to see the British
colonists as this meant work and money.   A large house was
erected for Enderby who had been elevated to the status of
Lieutenant-Governor.   Barracks, a storehouse, a jail (on
Shoe Island), a chapel and cottages for the settlers were also
built.   On New Year 's Day 1850 the settlement was formally
named Hardwicke in honour of the Earl of Hardwicke, the
Governor of the company.  
    But things soon began to go very wrong for the
idealist, Charles Enderby.   Vegetables and crops failed to
grow in the acid, peaty soil and too few whales were being
caught to provide the income for the colony.   In November
1850 the New Zealand Governor, Sir George Grey, arrived to pay
an official visit, but he left feeling pessimistic about the
settlement 's future.   By late 1851 the parent company in
England was becoming deeply concerned about the total lack of
revenue from whaling, and two Special Commissioners were sent
out to inquire into the affairs of the establishment, and if
necessary close the station down.   The
Lieutenant-Governor resisted vehemently at first their efforts
to relieve him of his position, but finally complied and
returned to England.   By 1852 the last of the settlers had
departed.  
    Today the only two buildings at Erebus Cove are the
derelict boatshed and castaway depot, both built after the
settlement was abandoned.   The boatshed is known as the
"Erebus Cove Museum" and contains relics collected from around
the Auckland Island group.   Further along the coast in the
rata forest are the remains of the hut sites and cobbled paths
of Hardwicke.   The "Victoria Tree" was carved during a
visit by HMCS   Victoria   in a search for castaways and
the flagstaff was erected by the   Amherst   to replace
the original Hardwicke flagmast.   Half of the known graves
in the Hardwicke cemetery are those of shipwrecked mariners.
  The most poignant reminder of the settlement is the
headstone of Isabel Younger who died on 19 November 1850, aged
three months.  
      Shipwrecks    
    With the notable exception of the
  Perseverance   and two ships lost on the Antipodes
Islands, most shipwrecks occurred on the Auckland Islands.
  At least eight ships ended their days on the rugged reefs
and cliffs of the Auckland Islands and over 100 lives were
lost.   But it is the accounts of the survivors and how they
eked out an existence on these cold inhospitable islands until
rescue finally came that stir the heart.  
        Grafton      
    The   Grafton   was driven aground in Carnley
Harbour during a violent storm in January 1864.   Captain
Thomas Musgrave and his four companions all managed to
struggle ashore and for over a year they lived in a crude hut
which they called "Epigwaitt" (Indian for "dwelling by
water").   Fortunately they were able to save the ship 's
dinghy and Musgrave, Raynal (a French adventurer) and one of
the crew set out on an epic voyage to Stewart Island, which
they reached safely five days later.   Barely recovered,
Musgrave returned in the rescue ship to pick up the two
remaining castaways.  
        Invercauld      
    The   Invercauld   was wrecked on the western
cliffs of Auckland Island in May 1864.   Nineteen of the
crew of 25 managed to get ashore but only Captain Dalgarno,
the first mate and a seaman were to survive the year that
followed.   They were eventually picked up from Enderby
Island by the Spanish brig   Julian  .   John Mahoney,
the second mate, was buried in the cemetery at Hardwicke where
his tombstone can be seen today.  
        General Grant      
    Probably the most famous wreck of all was the
  General Grant   which in 1866 drifted into a cavern in
the western cliffs of Auckland Island.   The foremast was
driven through the hull when it struck the roof of the cavern
and 68 people drowned as the ship sank.   The 15 survivors
set out in two of the ship 's boats for Disappointment Island
where they rested for two days before continuing on to Port
Ross.   In a desperate bid four men set out in an open boat
to seek help but were never seen again.   The remaining
castaways were eventually rescued by the   Amherst   in
1868.   Over the years there have been a number of searches
for the remains of the   General Grant   and the gold
that she was carrying, but so far without success.  
        Derry Castle      
    The   Derry Castle   was wrecked on the north
coast at Enderby Island in 1887.   Only eight of the
complement of 23 were able to make it to the shore and the
dead were buried in a mass grave.   For a time the survivors
lived in tussock huts which they built on the island.
  Later they constructed a punt to cross to the castaway hut
at Erebus Cove, where they were eventually found by the sealer
  Awarua  .   The figurehead from the   Derry
Castle,   which for a time stood over the mass grave, is
now in the Canterbury Museum.   The punt has recently been
brought out to the Southland Museum.  
        Dundonald      
    The barque   Dundonald   was wrecked on the
coast at Disappointment Island in 1907.   Twelve of the crew
were drowned in the surf but the survivors erected grass huts
where they existed through the winter.   Then becoming
desperate, they constructed a flimsy 
  photo  
  caption  
coracle out of branches in which they were able to cross to
the mainland and reach the depot at Erebus Cove.   They were
eventually rescued by the   Hinemoa   and the coracle
was brought out to the Canterbury Museum.   Jabez Peters,
the mate, lies buried in the Hardwicke cemetery.  
    After the earlier wrecks, castaway huts were erected
on all the New Zealand subantarctic islands and these were
serviced regularly by the government steamers up till 1927.
  Today the oldest of these huts still standing is the
Stella Hut at Sandy Bay on Enderby Island.   Built in 1880
by Captain McKenzie of the   Stella   it replaced an
earlier hut destroyed by fire.  
      Farming    
        Auckland Islands      
    In 1894 the Auckland Islands were divided into three
pastoral runs and offered for lease.   But only W. J.
Moffett took up his lease and in 1895 
  photo  
  caption  
he landed nine cattle and 20 sheep on Enderby Island.
  However, in 1900, G. S. Fleming established a homestead in
Carnley Harbour and landed 2,000 sheep there.   But the
sheep gradually perished and Fleming forfeited his lease in
1910.   In 1934 the whole island group was reserved for the
preservation of the flora and fauna.   The remainder of
Moffett 's wild cattle on Enderby Island are being removed.  
        Campbell Island      
    With less scrub and more tussockland, Campbell Island
proved to be a better proposition for farming than the
Auckland Islands.   In 1895 J. Gordon took up his lease of
Campbell Island for a sheep run.   Building a homestead and
woolshed at Tucker Cove in Perseverance Harbour he released
300-400 sheep on the island.   In 1900 he sold out to
Captain W. H. Tucker but remained on as manager.   With 
  photo  
  caption: Sealing on Campbell Island...  
help from the shore whalers during their off season, sheep
farming continued on Campbell Island up till 1931.   4,000
sheep and a few cattle were abandoned on the island.   It
was declared a nature reserve in 1954, and in 1970 and 1984
dividing fences were erected across the island to restrict the
destruction of the flora by animals.   The remaining wild
sheep were removed in 1990.   The site of the homestead and
woolshed is still evident at Tucker Cove.  
      Shore Whaling    
    With the decline of whaling in Cook Strait and the
offer of work on Tucker 's station a party of Tory Channel
whalers under Jack Norton set up a whaling station at
Northwest Bay on Campbell Island in 1909.   Using an open
whaleboat the party caught 13 whales in the first season and
hauled them ashore by capstan in Capstan Cove.   They
continued to hunt with success up to 1916 when the whole
complement of the station, including the five Norton brothers,
enlisted for the First World War.   The remains of the
capstan can still be seen at Capstan Cove.  
    Following Norton 's success H. F. Cook from the Bay of
Islands established a whaling station at North East Harbour on
Campbell Island in 1911.   Like Norton 's station, Cook 's
party caught 13 whales in their first season but the station
closed down with the advent of the First World War in 1914.
  Three trypots and other relics can still be seen at the
head of North East Harbour.  
      The Scientists    
    Both Germany and France sent expeditions to the New
Zealand subantarctic islands to observe the transit of Venus
in 1874.   The Germans chose the Auckland Islands and set up
their observatory at Terror Cove in Port Ross.   They were
lucky and the clouds cleared at the critical time of the
transit before closing in again.   The three brick pillars
used for mounting their instruments remain at Terror Cove.  
    The French sent their expedition in the   Vire  
(Captain J. Jacquemart) to Campbell Island where they
established their observatory at Venus Cove in Perseverance
Harbour.   But they were unlucky and only caught a glimpse
of Venus as it began to cross the sun.   Nevertheless they
made a thorough survey of the island and a number of their
French place-names will be found on the map.   Although the
grave of M. Duris, who had died on the expedition and was
buried on Point Duris, has not been found, the remains of the
observation station can be seen at Venus Cove.  
    Over the years many eminent scientists have visited
and studied the islands: Sir James Hector, Thomas Kirk, Sir
William Benham, Leonard Cockayne, Sir Charles Fleming and Sir
Robert Falla, to mention but a few.   The last two were
members of the famous "Cape Expedition" which was sent to
coastwatch in the islands during the Second World War.
Warned by the German Government that war was imminent the
German steamer   Erlangen   slipped quietly out of
Dunedin Harbour in late August 1939.   But Captain Grams had
only five     days      days'       fuel
aboard and he headed for the Auckland Islands in the hope of
finding firewood.   Rata logs were cut and loaded aboard in
Carnley Harbour and the   Erlangen   continued on her
way.   After the incident it was decided to mount a coastal
watch in the islands and volunteers were called for.   A
number of leading scientists were included in the party Which
was given the code name of "Cape Expedition".   The
expedition was taken down in the   Tagua   in 1941 and
coast watching stations were established at Tagua Bay in
Carnley Harbour, Ranui Cove at Port Ross and Tucker Cove in
Perseverance Harbour.   The ketch   Ranui   was
provided to act as a link between the stations.  
    Although the watch was discontinued at the end of the
war the Tucker Cove base was kept open to act as a weather
station.   But the base had been deliberately built back
from the harbour to avoid detection and was in an unsuitable
position for a modern scientific base.   A new station was
therefore constructed on Beeman Point and was opened in 1957.
  Today the three "Cape Expedition" stations are
derelict.    
  

          THE END OF COLD STORAGE ON THE
AUCKLAND WATERFRONT      
    by D.A Rae    
    With the introduction of container shipping, it became
evident that redundancy must eventually face the massive cold
storage buildings of the Auckland   Farmers'   Freezing
Co-operative Ltd (AFFCO) which, with various additions over
the years, have dominated the Eastern Reclamation of the
Auckland waterfront since 1883.  
    Right now it is much easier to load a container at the
dairy factory itself and transport it direct to the container
terminal in Auckland than to go to all the trouble of
transferring the dairy produce, first to a
    coal    cool      printing error according
to author   store for grading, freezing and storage, then
finally     leading    loading      printing
error according to author   it out to a shipping
container.  
    Many dairy factories now have their own cool stores
and freeze and store their own produce.   The grading is
done at the factory under a system of
    surveilance    surveillance     by the
Ministry of Agriculture, instead of, as before, all at a
central port cool store.  
    Consequently, the complex of buildings on the approach
to the Kings Wharf, variously dating
  photo  
from 1883, 1915, 1918, 1925, 1932 and 1934 have already been
razed to the ground along with the old Kings Wharf coal fired
power station which adjoined them.  
    The 1939 AFFCO building on the approach to the
Bledisloe Wharf (first named the Export Wharf in
1939    &semi;    )     still stands, but its many
floors of storage space are unrefrigerated and empty.   The
Auckland Harbour Board, and now presumably the Auckland
Regional Council as its successor, is equally bent on seeing
this building demolished as soon as leasehold contracts
allow.  
    As these historic Kings Wharf buildings which occupied
such an important place in the economy of the Auckland
Province will soon be not even a memory, the photographs which
follow will go some way to keeping a record of their
beginnings, their peak development, and their final
destruction.  
    The first picture showing the 1883 building standing
alone, comes from the Winkelmann collection of the
Auckland Institute and Museum.   It had been tentatively
dated as c.1920 in the collection but this was manifestly
incorrect as the first addition to this building (to double
its size) was made in 1915.  
    In Journal no.24 of April 1974, when the same
photograph accompanied an article on "The birth of the Meat
Export Trade", the then editor had estimated the date as about
1913.  
    However, the author has in his possession a photograph
of the Roughriders departing for the Boer War from the Kings
Wharf and marching past the 1883 building.   All the
surrounding area is identical in every detail, even to the
positions of the same small craft lying alongside the wharf,
so the conclusion must be that the true date is 1900.  
    At this date, the 1883 building is in its exact
original form as designed by the architects, Messrs Coxon and
Jackson of Auckland and Christchurch.   It is not, however
in its first glow of optimism!   The ill-fated first Company
- "New Zealand Frozen Meat and Storage Company" - had
over-extended itself to erect a structure too elaborate for a
fledgling industry and was already in considerable trouble at
the end of its first year of trading.  
    The article in Journal no.24 names the directors and
calls them the Auckland commercial aristocracy of the
time, as indeed they were.   But by the time that this
photograph was taken, many of them had suffered the same fate
as the Company
  photo  
which was wound up in 1889, with the shareholders losing
all their capital.  
    There is, in fact, a striking similarity (though on a
smaller scale), between these high-flyers of the 1880s and the
high-flyers of our recent 1980s.   In both cases, a building
boom at the beginning of the decade was followed by a
resounding crash towards the end.  
    A second company - "The Auckland Freezing Co. Ltd",
formed in 1889, acquired the assets at a "fire sale" price in
the same year and limped along until 1903 when it also folded.
  Stability came to the industry only with the founding of
"The Auckland   Farmers'   Freezing Co. Ltd" by a group of
Waikato farmers in 1903 and this company has survived to this
day.   In spite of many vicissitudes over the years, it has
grown beyond the wildest dreams of its founders and in 1990
will be the dominant meat processor for the whole of the North
Island.  
    A point of interest in the photographs of the original
Kings Wharf building, is the number of opening windows in the
facade.   At that stage of the building 's life, activities
such as cooking, canning and can making, as well as offices
and maintenance workshops required a good deal of
unrefrigerated space.   At a later date, the use of the
building exclusively as a cool store for dairy produce meant
that the windows were bricked up and although the mouldings
were still there, the blank facade is what remains in the
memories of most older Aucklanders.  
    The second picture shows AFFCO 's Auckland waterfront
buildings at the peak of their development and activity in
1963.  
    The old ornate 1883 building is in the centre
foreground, flanked by somewhat plainer "red-brick" additions
to right and left.   Immediately behind this row are two
taller blocks in     start    stark      printer
error according to author   reinforced concrete.   Then,
in the left foreground is the yellow coloured "Art Deco
    Periond    Period    " building known to the
company 's staff as "The Civic" from its resemblance to the
style of the Civic Theatre.  
    The railway line and the harbour breastwork formed
after the demolition of the old J.J. Craig store runs past the
"Civic" and the Kings Wharf power station and leads on to the
seven floored 1939 AFFCO building on the approach to the
Bledisloe Wharf.   In front of it are the single storeyed
ice room and workshops on each side of the rail yard.
  Further on again is the "temporary" war time annexe which
was still in place long after the war ended.  
    The main 1939 building can be seen to be connected to
the Bledisloe wharf by the overhead conveyor from the sixth
floor straddling the railway line.  
    At the end of the vista comes the French Street milk
powder store with its three gables and
    venitlators    ventilators    
    onthe    on the     approach to the Jellicoe
Wharf.  
    Altogether, an almost continuous sweep of Affco owned
buildings round the perimeter of the roadway and rail tracks
shown in the photograph.  
    The 1939 building had the Company 's Head Office and a
certain amount of recreational space on top of the six
refrigerated storeys.   As the Head Office called for a
certain amount of prestige, the resulting design was for the
most elegant cool store in the country, which it still
remains, though under the threat of demolition.  
    The conveyor to the Bledisloe wharf which was put in
place with such high hopes of quick and efficient loading, was
used only for a period during the 1951 waterfront strike when
the army was called in to load the ships.   For the rest of
its life it remained out of action - a memorial of union power
of obstruction.  
    From the time the 1939 building was occupied, a great
problem arose from pollution from the Kings wharf power
station on a scale that would never be tolerated today.
  Great piles of cinders accumulated in the yards and on the
roof of the building and swirled around in every wind.
  This was a particular trial to the butter graders on the
ground floor who were trying to keep up high standards for the
export produce in the gritty
  photo  
atmosphere.   On the top floor, the windows were sealed and
the early type of air conditioning was supposed to be dust
proof, but the cinders got into the ducts and large black
circles soon appeared around all the vents.   "Cinder in the
eye" was an occupational hazard for all the staff and hardly a
day passed without     called    a
call      printer error according to author   for the
volunteer ambulance man with the Optrex bottle.  
    In time the chimney emissions were modified, but the
trouble was never fully solved until the station stopped
generating.  
    The French Street store still stands but is not owned
by AFFCO at the present day and is used for purposes
unconnected with dairy produce.  
    Picture no. 3 shows the Kings Wharf "red-brick"
frontages immediately prior to their demolition in May
1973.  
    At this stage, the facades had been shorn of most of
their decorative stonework and their parapets had been
removed.  
    A few years before, an ominous crack
    and    had     developed in the brickwork of
the 1918 "cheese store" next to   Hellabys'   building and
pieces of masonry had begun to fall from the 1883 building on
to the street below.  
    When a substantial piece narrowly missed the Union
delegate standing outside, remedial action, which had been put
off while only the general public
    as    was     at risk, became a matter of
urgent necessity!  
    Consequently, much of the character of the older
buildings had been lost before they were swept away.  
    Picture nos 4 and 5 show the actual act of
    demoliton    demolition     of the "red-brick"
blocks in 1973 - the
  photos  
  caption  
action of the swinging lead ball making short work of the
brickwork.  
    Picture no. 6 shows some of the very substantial
reinforced concrete buildings which remained on the Kings
Wharf     approached    approaches      printer
error according to author   after the older buildings had
gone.   These blocks, which could have stood for another 100
years, were to prove a much more difficult task for the
demolition hammers when they too had to go in 1988.   Even a
fire that broke out during the course of the demolition didn't
help very much, and the great steel columns put up a long
resistance.  
    However, during their remaining life, these buildings
were tidied and painted and a striking mural was designed by
the AFFCO architect, Mr L.F. Hodgkinson and became a downtown
landmark from 1975 to 1987 when the project to clear the
whole area began.  
    Now nothing remains on the Kings Wharf site and we
have the nearest thing to a "level playing field" that our
politicians are so obsessed with!    
        REGAINING STEAM    
    RAILWAY ARCHEOLOGY IN NEW ZEALAND  
    MANY readers will have fond memories of the steam
locomotive era.   When it came to an end around 1970,
something that had been a constant for many years went out of
our lives.   The something was hard to define but there is
little doubt that the passing of this distinctive form of
motive power represented one of the milestones of the
twentieth century.  
    Having played such an important part in our
development over one hundred years, it was sad to see
remaining locomotives meet their fate under the scrapper 's
torch.   Indeed they were cut up with almost
indecent   caption    photo   haste, almost as
if the powers-that-were were afraid to leave them intact.  
    The small band of railway enthusiasts of the time
watched as hundreds of locomotives disappeared forever.
  Very few had the means to do anything to save the large
and heavy locomotives.   Fortunately a small but significant
number escaped, purchased at the eleventh hour by various
individuals and syndicates.   Others found their way into
playgrounds, a few into museums.   The New Zealand Railways
even retained about ten for a variety of reasons.  
    Gradually various "preservation groups" evolved over
the past twenty years with, today, nearly thirty such groups
spread fairly evenly around the country.   Some are highly
developed such as the Glenbrook Vintage Railway, Steam
Incorporated, and the Pleasant Point Railway.  
    Today about 126 steam locomotives are known to
survive, the majority in the hands of the preservation groups.
  Seventy six are ex New Zealand railways while the
remaining 50 are mostly small industrial types&semi; formerly
working at sawmills, freezing and fertiliser works.   About
30 of the large railways "tender" type can still be found
including seven of the big K, KA and KB classes.  
    Surprisingly nearly 50 are either in operating
condition or under overhaul, the result of years of dedicated
restoration work by small bands of enthusiasts.   Main line
steam running is once again with us&semi; the impossible dream of a
few years ago.   The sight of steam hauled excursion trains
is becoming a more common sight, with groups highly
organised.  
    But there are other steam locomotives around that
are not included in the above tally.   Not easily found,
they do exist&semi; many dumped to form river and sea protection
against the erosion of banks supporting railway lines.   For
decades they have been ignored however a small group of
enthusiasts have put in a lot of time locating such dump sites
and recording the locomotives and equipment.  
      Many were dumped well before the age of steam came
to an end for the NZR, being disposed of between 1925 and 1940
during a major "cleanup" of the locomotive fleet.   In the
ten years leading up to 1930 no fewer than 14 classes of
locomotive disappeared entirely from the tracks.   A
further 12 classes were severely depleted.   By 1940 most of
these had also disappeared.  
    Where did they go?   The demand for scrap metal in
those interwar years appears not to have been great and while
some were simply stripped of usable parts, many were just
towed and dumped in a river or along a troublesome foreshore
where erosion threatened the line or railway yards.
  Sometimes almost a train of condemned engines
  photo  
were disposed of in this way.   A few more were dumped in
the late 1950s but scrap metal prices had lifted in response
to post war material shortages and many a locomotive was
shipped
  photo  
  caption  
to Japan.   Later there was a change of destination to
Pacific Scrap in Auckland, but not of policy.   Large
numbers disappeared in this manner.  
    Today a small handful of part time railway
archeologists have tracked down the scattered dump sites.
  Foremost is probably Timaru enthusiast Mark Denne,
recently appointed manager of the Pleasant Point Railway
Museum in South Canterbury.   Mark has spent a
considerable amount of time researching old files and locating
old dump sites.  
    Amongst places identified have been two sites on
Southland 's Oreti river, the Oamaru foreshore, various places
along the Waimakariri and Bealey rivers in the Arthurs Pass
region, Omoto on the Grey river and Seddonville north of
Westport.  
    Few places have been located in the North
    island    Island    .   The author stumbled
on one such dump site during an evening stroll along the New
Plymouth beach in 1983.   Whilst climbing around a small
cliff area just north of the old railway station, I found
myself hanging on to something that looked like a rock but
certainly didn't feel like one.   Closer examination in
failing light revealed the sand dome of a locomotive and,
shortly afterwards, I discovered I was standing on the
boiler.  
    A subsequent visit with Mark Denne resulted in a
number of locomotive parts being identified.   Some were
probably only scrapped boilers but at least one was fairly
positively identified as a "WD" class tank-locomotive.   We
later located a photograph of such a locomotive shortly after
being dumped there.  
    Others were known to have been dumped in the Westfield
area near Auckland and behind the Gisborne locomotive sheds.
  The boiler of an early Rogers K still lies on the shore
near Paekakariki.  
    Early in 1990 another dump site was located just south
of Pahiatua and already what is thought to be the major part
of another WD tank locomotive has been salvaged.   It is
thought that more parts and possibly complete locomotives
could be buried under tonnes of limestone rock in this area.
  There is evidence to suggest that the site may hold the
answer to one of the great railway mysteries in New Zealand -
the final resting place of the Baldwin locomotives of our most
successful private line, the Wellington Manawatu Railway
Company.  
    Some sites have already yielded up complete
locomotives.   In 1974 the Oreti river gave up K88, the
locomotive that had drawn the very first
Christchurch-Dunedin passenger train in 1878.   It was
successfully recovered by a local team in 1974 and its later
complete restoration by an Ashburton group led by the late
Bob Anderson is a major success story in locomotive
preservation.   K88 was restored to steam again for a number
of years and is currently laid up with a boiler problem and
awaiting eventual repair.   Two more Rogers Ks were
recovered - K92 now under rebuild in Southland and K94
currently thought to be in storage in Ashburton.  
    More recently a small team led by Wellington
enthusiast Hugh Stockbridge successfully salvaged two
locomotives from Coal Creek near Seddonville north of
Westport.   These are believed to be the sole survivors of
the WB tank locomotives built by the Baldwin works in the USA
in 1898.   When salvaged in 1989 they were therefore 91
years old and in quite reasonable condition considering it had
been close on thirty years since they had been dumped.   As
with K88, it is hoped they will one day grace the tracks
again.  
    About 1976 two small Bagnall industrial locomotives
were also dug out and retrieved&semi; one from a site near one of
the Waitakere Dams and the other from an old quarry near
Motuhora inland from Gisborne.   At least one of these is
believed to be under restoration.   Another 20 have been
retrieved from playgrounds, parks and from use as stationary
boilers.   Whilst these are in a different category, their
retrieval and, in some cases, restoration are just as
important.  
    What does the future hold?   How many more will be
retrieved or what further discoveries will be made?   Few
records were kept of the various engine dumpings and railway
archeologists must spend many hours trying to
  photo  
  caption  
piece together the clues that remain.   Even locomotives at
even known sites can prove elusive, some being covered up by
later works or even rivers.  
    Prime possibilities for recovery are three relatively
intact locomotives&semi; two at Omoto just a short walk from the
bridges across the Grey river just outside Greymouth, and
another near Hawera.  
    The two Omoto engines are UB330 (Baldwin 1901) and
UC365 (Sharp Stewart
  photo  
  caption  
and Co, Glasgow 1901).   They lie amongst a pile of other
engines, having been dumped there in 1958 and 1961
respectively.   Virtually the only survivors of these two
famous classes, the two are also perhaps the last examples of
the 4-6-0 wheel arrangement to exist in New Zealand.
  They lie on the inside of a curve and present a difficult
lift for a crane due to their distance from the railway track.
  An attempt from a barge mounted crane may prove a more
viable option.  
    The Hawera example is AB745 which ran into a washout
just south of the town one night back in 1956.   At the time
the main trunk line was closed due to slips and the decision
was made to abandon the locomotive and cover it with fill
in order to get the line back in operation as soon as
possible.   Today, from all accounts, it lies intact.
  Several groups have given some thought to its salvage
but to date nothing has been attempted.   Its proximity to
the main line may provide problems however it remains a
possibility for the future.   When one sees the difficulties
overcome in recovering the three Rogers K 's and the WBs,
the recovery of AB745 is a formidable but not impossible
task.  
    To date at least seven locomotives have been
recovered.   One has already graced the tracks again and
another, K92, is expected to do so during 1991.   Several
more are thought to be undergoing rebuilds.  
    Twenty years ago few would have thought it possible
and no doubt the next twenty years will see some more major
recoveries&semi; any one of the above Omoto or Hawera locomotives
will be an important event.  
    As for the mystery of the fate of the Wellington
Manawatu Railway (WMR) locomotives - even pinpointing the
location of one is the "the big one" which drives the railway
archeologists on like oil drillers hoping for a gusher.
  How could a dozen or so locomotives vanish without trace?
  Surely they might just have been dumped ....
somewhere!      
  

      ORARI   - the story of a South Canterbury
settlement  
    by Lionel A Percy  
    DURING 1857, on one of many trips south, Thomas Cass,
chief surveyor of the Canterbury District, came upon an
area known as Fitzgerald.   After crossing the Orari River
he decided he would call the area Orari, the Maori name for
butterfish.  
    While examining the area, Mr Cass decided the land
might have great potential for dairying and agriculture and,
as soon as he returned to the Land Office in Christchurch, he
wrote to the Commissioner of Waste Lands in Auckland.   At
the time Auckland was the capital of New Zealand until the
seat of government was shifted to Wellington in 1863.  
    Dated 11 June 1857, the letter was an application
recommending a reserve of 100 acres for the township of Orari,
providing it had an accommodation house and a ferry.   The
letter was quickly sent and it wasn't long before there was a
reply from the Commissioner, agreeing to the recommended
reserve, running parallel to the Orari River on the south
bank.  
    Some time after Mr Cass had been to Orari, a bushman
by the name of John Giles built the first accommodation house,
approximately 300 yards south of the river crossing on the
east side of what would later become the South Road.   Mr
Giles applied for a conditional licence in 1858 and it was
granted the same year.   The conditions included: stables
for at least three horses&semi; a good supply of oats&semi; a stockyard&semi;
and beds for weary travellers.  
    Mr Giles had sufficient stables for five horses, a
continuous supply of oats and sleeping accommodation for 14
people, and on the very few occasions of overcrowding Mrs
Giles had to forfeit her bed.  
    Issued a provisional licence in 1860, Mr Giles didn't
stay long and sold the house to William Stranks.   Things
picked up rather rapidly and it wasn't too long before Mr
Stranks was widely known for his superb fish dinners.
  Every coachman, weary hungry traveller and local
householder couldn't wait to sample the exquisite cuisine
served there.   In fact on the very porch of the house was a
sign reading:
  GOOD FISH DINNERS
DANCING
SATURDAY AND SUNDAY
NIGHTS     in a box    
    Those were the days.   No telephone was needed, as
word spread faster by bush telegraph.   After Mr Stranks
left there were many more owners, the last being Samuel 
  photo  
  caption  
  photo  
Breadley who stayed only a few years.  
    Sadly, in 1887 the accommodation house was destroyed
by fire and, although no lives were lost, nothing could be
saved.   The cause of the fire was a loose gas lamp falling
from its wall mounting, on to the landing in the stairway and
igniting the tinder-dry timber of the stairs.   The fire
quickly burned the second storey and then continued its
destructive way through the ground floor, leaving pieces of
charred timber in its wake.  
    Since 1853 the Macdonalds had owned the Orari Estate,
with an area of 20,334 acres spreading from the Orari River to
the Rangitata River and from the sea to the upper Orari
Bridge.   Through those early years runholders and farmers,
most of them of English descent, often held horse racing
events and hunts on their properties, with prizes often
consisting of bridles and saddles, for first and second
places.  
    Everyone enjoyed themselves and always had a great day
out.  
    W.K. Macdonald was one such person who always liked
riding horses and about March 1859 he decided why not have a
racecourse to race on? In the next couple of days some friends
of his, Hewlings, Jollie, Young and Colonel McPherson, headed
off to view a piece of ground near where the present Orari
Racecourse now stands.   They set to and cleared most of the
tussocks and matagouri bushes and harrowed a circular one-mile
track.  
    By the end of March the course was ready and was
marked off with flags at each furlong.   The big day came, 1
April 1858, sun shining, track in fine racing condition.
  Representing Orari was E.H. Martelli who would be riding
W.K. Macdonald 's arabian bred horse Niger, and representing
Waimate was G. Brayshaw on Michael Studholme 's horse Sir
Charles.  
    Entrance fee was two pounds, a 50 pound wager was set
and the race would go into the history books in years to come
as the very first recorded race in South Canterbury.   The
race started, and off went Niger straight into the lead,
keeping Sir Charles four to five lengths behind.   It was to
be a long race, three times round the one-mile circuit, and
coming down the home stretch Niger, with its good stamina, was
still holding on to first place and won easily at the finish
line.  
    Orari contained only four houses in 1859: Macdonald 's,
Austin 's, the accommodation house and Thomas Bushell Pierce 's.
  Mr Austin worked on the Orari Estate for some time as a
labourer, while Mr Pierce was the first orchardist in
Orari.  
    A weekly mail service from Orari to Geraldine, five
miles to the west, began on 1 January 1868 and three years
later the first post office was opened in a room that
eventually joined on to the first railway station.   The
railway was being laid from Ferrymead to Christchurch and from
Christchurch to Timaru and would later go to Dunedin.
  Contractors were needed as it was laid in sections between
towns.   Enroute tenders would be called for and W. Fuller
of Christchurch got the contract for 12,502 pounds for the
section between Ealing and Temuka.   The track was soon laid
and on 4 February 1876 the section through Orari was
officially opened.  
    During 1872 5,949 letters and 1,447 books and
newspapers were despatched from Orari.   The first census
was taken in 1878, when the population was 133 persons.   No
township was laid out until April 1879 and ground in Orari was
offered for sale later on in the year for 30 pounds an acre,
but very few sections were sold.   The township was
resurveyed in larger sections in October 1886 (as can be seen
on the map) and was let as village homestead sections.  
    With the railway up and running there was a great need
for maintenance crews to work on the line, so carpenters were
soon busy erecting railway style houses for the employees.
  As more railways workers came to the district there was
great need for a school for their children, so in 1879 the
first school was opened in Slack Street north, with the first
recorded meeting of the school committee being held on 18
September 1880.   It came to be known as the South Orari
School, consisting of just one room.  
    The first teacher was J.S. Sumner, who remained for
two years and was followed by F.J. Fraser.   In 1881 the
roll stood at 47 pupils, but the average attendance was rather
low and the committee had great difficulty in keeping the
school a free Education Board school.   Apparently schools
with an average below 25 pupils were known as aided schools
and the residents of such a district had to pay part of the
educational costs to teach the children.  
  photo  
  captions  
  photo  
    By 1883 the roll had increased to 65, so an additional
classroom was added to the existing one.   Soon after 1900
the school had grown sufficiently to need a third teacher, so
the second room was divided in half by a curtain.  
    In 1923, during the late afternoon of 23 August when
school had finished for the day, fire drifted slowly through
the school building.   Most records were able to be saved,
but soon afterwards the fire quickly demolished the school to
ground level, probably caused by an overheated chimney.
  Until a new school was built in 1924, a large tent and a
shelter shed were used for classrooms.  
    Les Pierce was the first school bus driver in 1927,
also delivering mail and stores in the Belfield-Orari area.
  William Mason was the first storekeeper in the township
and his store, consisting of an ironmongery, bakery, butchery
and drapery, ideally stocked with grocery lines as well, was
opened in 1881.   The store was situated on the west side of
the Main South Highway near the corner of Orari Street, now
known as Orari Station Road and also a route to Geraldine.
  Mr Mason also had 120 acres of good agricultural
ground where he grew wheat, reaping 97 bushells to the acre in
one season.   Fire completely destroyed Mason 's Store in
1929.  
    In 1927 another store was built near the corner of
Slack Street on Orari Station Road.   Known as Henderson 's
Grocery Store, it was later mortgaged to Morrison 's in
Geraldine as Henderson went bankrupt, and after the store was
cleared of all items Henderson 's son made it into a billiard
hall.  
    Around 1928 another store was built, this time on the
eastern side of the Main South Highway, more or less opposite
the corner of Orari Station Road.   People by the name of
Burkes were the first owners, followed by the Killohs and then
the Becks.   While the Killohs were in business the
opportunity arose to take over Henderson 's Billiard Hall,
which from then on was known as Killoh 's Billiard Hall.
  During the Second World War the billiard hall was used as
a Red Cross centre and in 1947 it was sold for 150 pounds to
Geraldine Transport for offices.   Now Mount Cook
Freightlines owns the offices which can still be seen opposite
  photo  
  captions  
  photo  
North End Ford in Geraldine.  
    Mr and Mrs L. Sanders took over Beck 's Store in 1954,
staying for 30 years in Orari as storekeepers.   On 9
September 1978 the Orari Store was destroyed by fire, causing
more than $60,000 worth of damage.   Nothing was left except
charred remains of a few of the studs and floor joists.
  Two fire appliances, three tankers and two pumps, along
with 26 firefighters, battled to bring the blaze under
control.  
    A house nearby, where the Sanders had lived while
running the store, was soon converted into a shop and the
Sanders moved into an adjacent house.   The new shop was
soon up and running, but Mr Sanders was forced to give up
through ill health and people by the name of McBeth leased the
shop for about six months.   After the McBeths left Mr and
Mrs Des Garnham took over the lease and have been there ever
since.  
    During 1881 a reserve of 87 acres 3 roods was set
apart to become the Geraldine Racecourse Reserve, being
gazetted in the same year.   It is understood that at some
stage a grandstand of round construction was built opposite
the six furlong post and at one time the horses may have raced
clock  -  wise.   The straight was obviously between the
five and six furlong posts.   A stand containing 11 tiers of
seats to accommodate 250 people was erected in 1882 along with
a   judges'   box and   stewards'   room, but in 1884
fire completely destroyed the stand at the six and most of the
course records.  
    It is not known in what year the caretaker 's house
was built on the Racecourse Reserve, but the first caretaker
to take up residence was Samuel Breadley in 1895.   Two rows
of stables were erected behind the caretaker 's house some time
during that period and were destroyed by fire on 22 November
1957.   The back wall of the 1882 grandstand was gutted by
fire on 21 March 1983, through the boiler being left
unattended while it was still hot.   The back wall was
soon mended and the grandstand still stands today on the site
it was first built on.  
    Many horse trainers have trained horses in Orari over
the years and my uncle L.H. Pratt is just one of them.   He
taught Bill and his brother Bob Skelton to ride and in the
1952-53 season my uncle was the leading horse trainer of
Canterbury, Bill Skelton was leading jockey and brother Bob
was leading apprentice.   L.H.     Pratt has trained
more than 700 horses to date and still has three in work.  
    In 1903 a new two-storeyed hotel opened its doors to
the public.   Sited opposite the railway station on the
eastern side of the Main South Highway, it was known as
Quirke 's Hotel as they owned it, and also called The
Fisherman 's Rest.   There were 45 stables behind the hotel
and horse sales were held in the adjoining yard.   School
teachers and horse trainers often boarded at the hotel.
  Around 1905, with changes to the electoral boundaries, the
district went dry and Quirke 's Hotel became a boarding house.
  It was pulled down in July 1965.  
      A yarn that comes to mind concerns a young fellow
who was courting a young lady residing at Quirke 's.   On
this particular day he went to town and bought himself a flash
new suit as he was going to see his lady friend that night.
  Night time came and off he went on his motorcycle to
arrive at the boarding house, not realising he had been
followed by the local hard cases of Orari.  
    He never used the front entrance, but always climbed
up one of the verandah posts and in through her bedroom
window.   While he was visiting this night, the local lads
set to with paintbrushes and buckets of a sticky substance and
painted the post he had climbed.   When the courting was
finally over the particular fellow in question climbed out the
window, slid down the post which he thought was covered in
frost because of its stickiness and, jumping on his
motorcycle, headed for home.  
    What a shock he got when he arrived home, for there
down the middle of his new suit was a stripe of none other
than Stockholm Tar.   Many a laugh was had over that
little story, and there are a lot more that happened in those
good old days.  
    Another that comes to mind is that of an old bloke who
lived by the railway line.   Every so often the slow train
would come along and the men on it would throw off some coal
for him.   One day they were most generous and threw off
enough coal to fill three sacks, so over to the line the old
bloke went and filled his three sacks with coal.  
    What he didn't know was that another gentleman from
Orari had seen him.   Of course the old fella who filled the
sacks always left them near the line and came to collect them
once it was dark.   On this particular day he was due for a
shock as the other gentleman took the sacks home and filled
his own coal bins, refilling the sacks with stones and
returning them to their hiding place near the railway line.
  It wasn't until a few days later when the old fella went
to get some coal for his fire that he realised he had been
tricked.      
  

        Bolton Street Memorial Park    
    Hugh Fullarton  
      After a quarter of a century, the opening of an
extension to the Bolton Street Memorial Park offered
Wellington some recompense for the destruction of part of its
most historic cemetery.    
  captions    photos    
    About eighteen months after the first New Zealand
Company settlers had arrived on Petone Beach, the need for a
cemetery to serve the new settlement of Wellington was
recognised.   In August 1841, eighteen acres of land
adjacent to the lower end of Bolton Street and extending
westwards to Tinakori Road were formally designated for that
purpose.   In later years, the area of the cemetery was
significantly reduced - for reasons fully explained in
Margaret Alington 's history of the cemetery,   Unquiet
Earth  , published in 1978.   Certainly no more
appropriate title for this book could have been chosen as it
describes the cemetery 's first stormy years, the related
constitution of three separate cemeteries, the pressures for a
new cemetery, and the controversial extension of adjacent
Bowen Street for the construction of a tram and roadway link
with Tinakori Road.   However, a still greater conflict was
to arise when the Wellington Urban Motorway severed the
cemetery reserve - a major issue also recorded in   Unquiet
Earth  .  
    This article sets out some of the developments which
followed on from the decision to construct a motorway to the
opening of an extension to the Bolton Street Memorial Park on
27 March 1990 - twenty-five years after it had been promised
to the citizens of Wellington.  
    Motorway Action  
    In the late 1950s, the necessity for a marked
improvement in the standard of highway serving the Capital
City was abundantly clear.   Initial steps to meet that need
were taken by the Ministry of Works in 1959 when several
tentative routes were the subject of a close study and
consultation with the City Engineer.  
    In September 1960, following an investigation of
roading developments in overseas countries, the City Engineer
strongly advised his Council to retain a firm of
transportation consultants to prepare a master transportation
plan for the city.   The recommendation was accepted.   In
October 1961, De Leuw Cather representatives commenced action
on this major work.   Their project manager was urged by the
District Commissioner of Works to find, if possible, a
better route than the one currently under consideration
because it adversely affected the Bolton Street Cemetery.
  However, in August 1961, the consultants recommended
the adoption of a route that still traversed those historic
acres.  
    In May 1965, after much discussion and soul-searching,
the City Council and the National Roads Board, with the
support of the Government, authorised the adoption of the
motorway route recommended by the consultants.   The
Ministry of Works, as the design and construction agency
of the Roads Board, was then faced with many human engineering
problems, as well as problems calling for expertise in civil
and structural   photo    caption  
engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land
purchase and administration.  
    Motorway Design Criteria  
    In the development of design proposals for the
Wellington Motorway, Ministry of Works officers were concerned
to do more than construct a facility having adequate traffic
capacity and high standards of safety.   They were
determined also to have close regard to environmental and
humane issues.   Their aim was to locate the motorway with
great care, to construct graceful associated structures, and
to have adjacent areas landscaped and planted in such a manner
that, when completed, the entire work would be not only
functionally efficient but also pleasing to the eye.   The
New Zealand Institution of Engineers, by granting its
first environmental award to the motorway project in 1972,
recognised the attainment of that high purpose.   Their view
was endorsed by the award of an   Engineering 1990  
plaque which noted in particular the efforts made to develop
the motorway in an   "environmentally
sensitive"   manner.  
    Planned Park Extension  
    Following a decision on the motorway route, the City
Council took steps to make cemetery land available for the
proposed work - free of cost.   For its part, the National
Roads Board in May 1965 approved a Ministry of Works
recommendation that an   "Early   Settlers'  
Memorial Park"   extending the full length of Mowbray
Street from Bolton to Bowen Street, together with a piazza
over the motorway, should be provided to compensate - at
least in part - for the loss of public open space.   The
Board accepted financial liability for the cost of these
works, and the City Council enthusiastically supported their
execution.   Many citizens, in particular members of the
Bolton Street Cemetery Preservation Society as well as the
Board of the New Zealand Historic Places Trust, remained
strongly opposed to the motorway scheme&semi; others pressed just
as strongly for its early completion.  
    Progress and Problems  
    Over succeeding years, motorway construction proceeded
steadily southward through the Bolton Street Cemetery and so
to Ghuznee and Vivian Streets where, for financial reasons, it
was halted by the Roads Board.   The concurrent construction
of the motorway and the associated memorial park had been
proposed.   Sadly, acquisition of the land necessary for
that procedure - although pressed vigorously over several
years - could not be achieved.   It was mainly this factor
that led to the formation of the Friends of Bolton Street
Cemetery Inc. in 1977  .    
    The proposed addition to the cemetery reserve needed
for the memorial park called for the acquisition of land owned
by the City Council, the Dairy and Meat Marketing Boards, the
Reserve Bank and the University Grants Committee.
  Council land was readily available.   Acquisition of the
further essential areas was proposed on the following basis:
&bullet;   Dairy and Meat Board land would be
exchanged for land within the then proposed off-ramp loop
at Bowen Street.
&bullet;   Reserve Bank land would be exchanged for
the Mowbray Street road reserve following the closing of
the street.
&bullet;   University Grants Committee land (required
in part also for the widening of Bowen Street and a proposed
motorway on-ramp) would be made available by the relocation of
the Committee 's office.  
    Significant Developments  
    Progress on the motorway and the associated memorial
park project was seriously affected by several significant
developments:
&bullet;   The City Council, when reviewing its
district planning scheme, was unable to zone the proposed park
as 'Reserve' or 'Open Space' because amendments to the
Public Works and Town and Country Planning Acts restricted
such zoning to land owned by the Council.   The land
required for the park was then zoned 'Office B' - which led to
a marked increase in its value.   Objections to this zoning
were lodged by the Friends Society, but to no avail.
&bullet;   The National Roads Board found that
inflation and the demands of motorway programmes were severely
straining its resources.   Accordingly, it 
  photos    captions  
decided to construct only one carriageway beyond Bolton Street
and to defer - and later abandon - the proposed construction
of on- and off-ramps at Bowen Street.   That decision
negated the proposed land exchange for Dairy and Meat Board
land.   It also adversely affected negotiations to acquire
the University Grants Committee land.
&bullet;   The Dairy and Meat Boards emphasised the
need for adequate carparking facilities to be available in any
settlement.   Efforts made over several years to find an
alternative site for their offices were unsuccessful.
&bullet;   The Reserve Bank likewise required any
settlement to make adequate provision for carparking.
  The proposed exchange of Bank land for Mowbray Street road
reserve was frustrated by a Supreme Court decision.
&bullet;   Representatives of the University Grants
Committee in May 1965 had recognised the need for their
land to be acquired for motorway works, and they had commented
favourably on the associated park development proposal.
  However, following the modification of motorway plans,
all efforts to acquire their land failed.
&bullet;   The City Council advised the Roads Board to
build a footbridge over the motorway rather than the planned
piazza.  
    Reappraisal of Situation  
    The developments outlined above led to a
reappraisal of the situation by all authorities
concerned.   In May 1980 the National Roads Board
expressed its inability to agree to the purchase and
development of the Dairy and Meat   Boards'   land, but
offered $200,000 towards the memorial park project and $50,000
for the restoration of the chapel, an offer which was declined
by the Council.   Then in February 1981 the Roads Board 
  maps  
repeated its previous offer, coupled with a long  -  term
lease of the on-ramp land taken from the cemetery in 1967 - an
offer which was also declined.  
    At about this time the Minister of Works and
Development and Chairman of the National Roads Board advised
the Friends of the Bolton Street Cemetery that the
  "imaginative proposals which had been so widely
acclaimed"   could not be implemented as   "the
painstaking efforts made over many years to reconcile the
conflicting views of the Council and Dairy Board"   had
failed.   He added that many like himself remembered the
cemetery as it was in earlier days -   "unloved and
uncared for"   - and that   "the Roads Board
derived no satisfaction in not honouring undertakings, but
believed that it had gone as far as it could in prevailing
circumstances"  .  
    Finally, in July 1981 the Roads Board offered $500,000
in full and final settlement of all outstanding matters,
plus $50,000 for chapel restoration.   The City Council
accepted that offer and in so doing became fully responsible
for the development of the memorial park.  
    Memorial Park cum Carpark  
    Ministry of Works engineers and architects tried
earnestly, but without success, to find a solution to the land
acquisition problem by designing a carpark structure with a
memorial park extension overhead.   As time went on it
became clear from City Council and University Grants
Committee statements that plans for the proposed park
extension could no longer include Grants Committee land, even
though, with the support 
  caption    photo  
of the Roads Board and City Council, that was the stated
intention in 1965.  
    In March 1983, with a view to facilitating action, the
then Chairman of the Friends Society, the late Helmut
Einhorn, prepared a firm proposal for a carpark on Dairy
Board, Reserve Bank and Council land with the memorial park
above.   The Friends presented this proposal to the
authorities concerned.   An opportunity for consultation was
sought - but not granted.  
    The Final Solution  
    In April 1986 the City Council allowed the Friends to
see a proposal which Fletcher Development and Construction
had developed in consultation with the Council and Mowbray
Street land owners, and for which planning approval had been
sought.   This, it was hoped, would be a scheme which would
lead to the completion of the long delayed memorial project.
  In useful discussion with representatives of the Council
and Fletchers, the Friends were able to secure certain
desirable modifications to this scheme.  
    When the amended design came before the Council 's
Planning Committee in September 1986, it comprised a twelve
storey building occupying all of the Grants Committee land
and about half of the Reserve Bank land.   Over the balance
of the Reserve Bank land, the small area of Council land and
the Dairy and Meat   Boards'   land, a six level carpark
building in deep excavation was proposed.   Above that
structure an attractively landscaped park area, including
a chapel and linked to the existing memorial park, had been
designed.  
    John Daniels, then Chairman of the Friends and
Director of the Historic Places Trust, appeared before the
Council 's Planning Committee in support of the Fletcher
proposal, but drew attention to the following points:
&bullet;   The Friends had come to terms with the fact
that the land that was the subject of the application was
still in private ownership, and that an office building could
be erected there as of right.
&bullet;   The Friends could imagine far better
developments than the one proposed.   However, economic
and political reality dictated that they were not now
attainable.
&bullet;   Initial proposals had not been acceptable
to the Friends as they did not achieve the desired degree of
integration between the existing park and the proposed new
park over the top of the carpark building.   The compromise
put forward by Fletchers was, however, acceptable to the
Friends.  
    The End of the Saga  
    Fletcher 's   Fletchers is a colloquial abbreviation
for Fletcher Challenge.  This apostrophe is correct  
proposal was approved by the Council on the grounds that the
firm 's imaginative design warranted the dispensations sought.
  The Memorial Park project was finally completed early in
1990, and in March an opening ceremony was held.
  Addresses were given by the Mayor of Wellington, James
Belich, and historian Margaret Alington.   The mass
grave was consecrated, the reconstructed chapel dedicated, and
a bronze memorial 'book' was unveiled.   The extension to
the Bolton Street Memorial Park was then declared open.  
    The project had taken twenty-five years to bring to
fruition.   The sustained and conscientious efforts of
the Friends of Bolton Street Cemetery and Ministry of Works
officers had, at last, - in part - been successful.   An
asset for the city for all time had been created.    
  

            Flush Times, Bust Times        
        Money in the hand      
    Working people throughout the history of New Zealand
were repeatedly promised that their wages would get better
and better, that they could look forward to a future of ever
increasing prosperity.   The promise was almost always
fulfilled.   Every generation got richer, from the time the
colonists first stepped ashore up to the time working people
sat in front of their televisions watching the first steps
taken on the Moon.  
    Incomes in the late 1930s recovered quickly from the
slump.   New Zealand workers, grumbled one National
politician in 1936, were   'the highest paid workers in
the world'  .   Incomes kept growing, zooming up
seventy per cent during the war, then even faster after the
war.   Working people spent money as never before.
  Employers and the middle class protested that workers had
become underworked and overpaid.   Communists complained that
they had come to believe the   'illusions'  of
  'prosperity for ever'  .   Workers felt excited
and dizzy.     'We came here without a bean'  ,
enthused a hydro worker at Roxburgh in 1955&semi;   'now we
have this three-piece suite, the bedroom one, an expensive
radiogram, and I have bought the wife a fridge and a washing
machine ...   We 're hoping to get a car in November.'  
  A generation of binge had begun.   Working people in the
1960s bought televisions and stereos.   They bought pool
tables for their rumpus rooms.   They flew away for winter
holidays on the Gold Coast.   They staggered out of
supermarkets, trolleys tottering with food.  
    Wages not only grew bigger, but more secure.   Unions
won a wide range of allowances and extra payments to protect
workers from many of the old anxieties that had troubled their
parents and made their grandparents often worry where their
next bob might come from.   Payment was demanded from
employers for such things as   'bike money'  ,
  'tea money'  ,   'tool money'  .
  Workers negotiated   'penalty payments'  ,
extra pay for those forced to start their jobs early, finish
late, work overtime.   Some won   'confined space
money'  ,    'danger money'  ,    'dirty
work money'   or other special payments for hazardous,
unpleasant or demanding work.  
    Sickness, unemployment and old age were eased as the
welfare state paid new benefits much more generously than the
pennywise pensions of the old Liberal state.   Working people
no longer had to prove they were    'moral'   and
   'deserving'   before they were entitled to their
dole.   Accident Compensation, introduced in 1972, was one of
the most striking of the new welfare systems, providing injured
workers with a weekly benefit almost as good as a wage.
  Losing a limb was no longer a disaster which could destroy
a working class household.    
    Affluence seemed to have become an economic law.
  Working class schoolchildren in Timaru, invited by their
teachers in 1968 to write essays about the way things would be
by the end of the century, anticipated a world where people
would zoom along motorways astride motorbikes floating on air.
  People would all live in tall apartment blocks, thought
Pamela Newton.   The   'primitive way of life'  
of the 1960s, thought Roger Rae, would be transformed into a
new world inside   'huge skyscrapers'  .   Adults
found it as easy as children to think of the near future as a
time when a sun-bronzed people would frolic on hoverbikes,
recline inside giant buildings of glass.  
    The hoverbike of progress, however, stopped.   Timaru
and most other towns began to shrink.   Working people began
to grow poorer.   Single men on an average wage by the end of
the 1970s took home a pay packet, after tax and the loss of
overtime, worth not much more than nine dollars for every ten
they had brought home at the peak of the boom.   Women
workers were not hit quite so hard, a single woman on an
average wage managing to end the decade paid roughly what she
got at its start.   Her wage was urgently needed.   Slump
during the 1970s dismayed large numbers of working people&semi;
slump during the following decade was worse.   By 1990 the
real income of most wage and salary earners was worth
substantially less than at the start of the decade.
  Unemployment benefits fell too, worth only ninety-four
dollars for every hundred dollars paid seven years earlier.
  Old people found the real value of their pensions falling
unevenly until by the end of the decade the average
superannuation cheque was worth eighty-nine dollars for every
hundred dollars paid when the system first began.  
    Working people were in the middle of a generation
poorer than the generation before it.   Children who wrote
essays about skyscrapers in the 1960s had ended up unemployed
or in Australia.   Wages in the past had fallen for short
periods.   Workers had grown poorer during some years of the
1880s&semi; many had lost income during the early 1930s.   Never
had incomes fallen so steadily for so long.   Young people
leaving school in 1990 and looking for a job knew nothing but a
world where money got tighter and tighter.  
        Fair shares      
    Falling behind in a race to be rich was not necessarily
a bad thing.   People in the late 1960s and early 1970s often
looked forward to   'zero economic growth'   as a
cure for social ills, an escape from the malaise of suburbia,
the jerky oscillations of capitalism.  
    The race for high standards of living had certainly
never rewarded any of the winners with the prize of happiness.
  Wealth might shrink, but there was no reason why anybody
need suffer bad housing, bad food or bad health.   A smaller
national purse could be divvied out more fairly.   All
workers, argued the Federation of Labour in the early 1980s,
should have their working time cut back to a week of
thirty-five hours or less, without loss of pay.   Shortened
hours would open up new jobs for the unemployed, and would free
all workers to enjoy    'more educational, recreational
and leisure time'  .    captions    photos  
    Hours of work had always been a major concern of
working people.   High wages had often been thought too
costly if won at the expense of long hours, and unions had
always pressed employers for shorter days, longer breaks and
better holidays.   One of the most popular acts of the first
Labour government had been to cut the working week shorter, and
hours continued to shrink as the   'affluent
society'   thrived.   By 1970 public servants and many
clerks were working fewer than thirty-eight hours a week.
  Employers, desperate for workers to stay longer at their
machines or desks, offered higher and higher rates of overtime
pay to keep them there.   Holidays grew longer too.
  Labour turned the Saturday half-holiday into a full
holiday&semi; the weekend emerged in all its glory.
    'Statutory'   holidays increased to nine a
year, and most workers by the 1980s were officially entitled to
at least three full weeks away from work.  
    Shortening hours and longer holidays were knocked hard
by economic recession.   Working people suddenly became
desperate to get overtime or to    'moonlight'  .
  More and more workers were willing to stay on the job as
long as the employer demanded.   More and more employers made
use of contractors, casual workers, outworkers, asking from
them all kinds of broken hours, long hours, unspecified and
   'stretched'   hours.  
    Part-time work was a   'growth industry'  
based mainly on over  -  working women.   Fewer than one
out of ten paid workers during the flush years had been
part-time, but by 1990 they numbered more than one out of five.
  Most were women adding tiresome wage work to tedious
housework.   Often they found themselves kept at their
tasks  caption    photo  
longer than they were officially paid for.   Housewives were
used to long hours, to living in a world of unregulated and
endless work.   Like labourers in the nineteenth century,
they frequently dreaded the   'holidays'   of
others.   Holidays for a housewife meant more, not less,
work.   Appliances and gadgets were rammed in increasing
numbers into the houses of working people, but housework
remained a job where nothing was ever finished, where workers
were never given permission to knock off.     'You
never stop and you never come to the end'  , said one
housewife&semi;   'You 're always trying to catch up with
something'  .   Working class women, unable to control
the hours and conditions of work in their own kitchens, lacked
the time, the resources and often the energy to resist
exploitation when they took on wage or contract work as
well.  
    Overwork often ended with the worker falling sick,
though in the opinion of most middle class professionals the
main cause of ill health among working people was
  'bad'   personal habits, such as eating, drinking
and smoking too much.   Health problems in the late
twentieth century were increasingly defined by doctors as
   'diseases of affluence'  .   The people most
likely to sicken or die, however, were the   least  
affluent.   Only twelve out of every hundred rich men in one
city were in a state of   'other than good'  
health, but twenty-nine poor men, and thirty-five out of every
hundred poor women were ailing.  
    Women working in shops, offices and factories often
risked muscle injuries, problems with their joints, headaches,
disturbed vision and sometimes deafness or blindness from their
work.   Housewives suffered burns, chemical injuries,
electrocutions and other   'industrial accidents'  
in their kitchens, not to mention the ancestral   'bad
back'   of all housewives in all ages.   Housework was
not just dangerous, it was lonely and cheerless.   More than
four out of ten housewives with children in the working class
suburb of Hei Hei in 1986 were taking medication for stress or
depression.   Working men were even more likely than women to
suffer injuries or death in their work.   Death rates for
tradesmen, factory hands, labourers and miners during the 1980s
were much worse than for professional men or managers.   Ten
out of every thousand labouring men died each year, but only
four out of every thousand men working in professions or
management.  
    Death and disease visited the lives of working people
partly because of the high cost of health care.   Public
hospitals, enlarged by Labour during the 1930s, were forced
under Labour in the 1980s to shut down or cut back their
services.   Working people often found, as Mabel Howard had
discovered two generations earlier, that it was   'easier
to enter heaven than a public hospital'  .   Lack of
money caused tens of thousands of households to put off visits
to the doctor.   Mothers in working class districts began to
  'hoard medicines and administer them
themselves'  , according to one social worker.   They
   'dose their ailing youngsters with auntie 's
antibiotics'  , added a journalist.  
    Health problems were caused not so much by lack of
access to doctors, however, as by the difficulty many working
people found in looking after their own health.   Three out
of ten Christchurch families on low incomes were unable to
spend enough on food to provide   'a basic no-luxury
diet'  .   One in ten Hamilton families with four or
more 
  photo    caption  
children suffered from a shortage of food&semi; one in four did not
have fresh fruit available in the house.     'It 's
shocking to have to hide food from growing kids and say no to
them'  , protested one working class mother&semi;
  'I 've got apples hidden behind my dressing table and I
dish them out one at a time - now I have to do it with the
blasted eggs.'     Keeping warm and dry in winter was
often difficult.     'I turn the heaters off once the
children have gone to school'  , observed one
Christchurch woman.     'We have the heater going for
half an hour at night only'  , added another.
    'Last year I wore coats around the house'  ,
said a third&semi;   'I was scared of the power
bill.'      photo  
  caption  
    Working people, continuing to find their health broken
down by work, continued to be forced to bear many of the costs
which sickness or injury brought them.   Workers often lived
so close to the edge of their wage that they did not feel free
to convalesce on a government benefit.     'If I hurt
my back now, something like that'  , said a shearer,
  'that 's me buggered.'     Manual workers still
depended fundamentally on their strength and health to earn an
income.     'Well, you can't afford to be on a sickness
benefit'  , said John Dale, a labourer&semi;   'I 've
even asked to go back to work when I 've been
injured.'    
    Laws setting new controls over the health and safety of
workplaces proliferated during the mid twentieth century.
  Factories, shops, offices and warehouses were more firmly
regulated than ever before.   Timber workers, farm workers,
construction workers and many others were increasingly well
safeguarded too, while a wide variety of health laws imposed
other constraints on the power of employers to expose workers
to danger.   The net of laws, however, let many workers drop
through.   Laws could be evaded.   People often found
themselves working in places where laws did not apply.  
    Health and safety regulations touched particularly
lightly on the office buildings where so many workers now spent
their paid working lives.   Office buildings often
contaminated workers with dangerous pollutants from asbestos,
cable casings, adhesives, photocopiers and    'microscopic
organisms in carpets'  .   Computers brought a whole
new range of diseases to afflict the eyes, hands, backs and
heads of workers.   People suffering from   'computer
sicknesses'   at the Northern Trade Union health
centre by 1989 outnumbered those turning up in pain from
construction and factory work.     'Hi-tech'  ,
concluded a health officer, had   'brought in a whole lot
more worries instead of eliminating them.'    
    Safety laws, though often strict on paper, were not
always enforced in reality.     'You get dirt in your
skin, dirt in the air, the stuff you breathe'  ,
complained Peter King, moulder at an iron foundry&semi;   'I
started coughing up a lot of black stuff.'     Freezing
works continued to be dangerous places.     'One guy
got done in the leg'  , observed a labourer in one works,
  'he just collapsed into a bloody screaming
heap.'     The Islington works, employing up to 900
men, inflicted in a typical year at least 111 cuts and
lacerations, 65 sprains and strains, 36 crushings and
bruisings, 25 skin and bone infections and 21 fractures, and
numerous burns, scaldings or   'foreign bodies'  
in the eyes or other tissue of its workers.   Unsafe
practices were partly the   'fault'   of workers.
  Protective masks, gloves, goggles and other devices were so
clumsy and awkward that many felt uncomfortable using them,
especially when employers made no attempt to slow down the pace
of work.   Dangerous work, as always, was good business for
employers, bad luck for workers.    photo  
  caption  
    Long hours, dangerous or sickening work, further
sickness and even death from poverty, were not new to the lives
of working people.   Workers in the previous generation had
imagined that such things would disappear in the brave new
world of the late twentieth century.   Such things had not
disappeared.     'Death comes to the rich and poor
alike'  , noted one sociologist,   'but comes to
the poor sooner.'      
  

          Wild splendour      
        Deep in the subantarctic, where the
Furious Fifties welcome no intruder, aspiring settlers and
shipwrecked sailors encountered despair and failure on the
Auckland Islands.   Today these same islands are regarded as
some of New Zealand 's most magnificent wild
places.      
      WRITTEN BY LINDSAY POPE    
      A  LTHOUGH THEY LIE
far to the south of New Zealand, remote and rugged, the
Auckland Islands have provided the bleak setting for many
epic human dramas.   Like the basaltic cliffs which buttress
the islands against the southern currents, accounts of
endurance and despair, courage and futility rise out of the
ocean to defy the cynical blast of the Furious Fifties.  
    It was during the period of expansion into the
Pacific by the whale fishery at the turn of the 19th century
that they were discovered.   Returning from Australia, one
of the vessels of the renowned London merchant house, Samuel
Enderby and Sons, the   Ocean  , captained by Abraham
Bristow, sighted land on August 18, 1806.   Bristow 's log
records that   "The island, or islands, as being the
first discovered, I shall call Lord Auckland 's (my friend
through my father)"   and that   "this
place, I should suppose, abounds with seals, and sorry I
am that the time, and the lumbered state of my ship, do not
allow me to examine."    
  illustration  
  caption  
    Bristow returned the following year and claimed them
for the British Crown.  
    Immediately the news of the discovery became
known, sealers descended on the islands like vultures on
fresh carrion.   Operating in shore gangs, they clubbed
their timid quarry, prepared the skins for sale and rendered
down the carcasses to extract the oil.   Being a lucrative
trade, and the sealers secretive, few accounts of their
  "tough and bloody business"   survive.  
    Such was the exploitation of the fur seal rookeries
that by 1830 Captain Benjamin Morrell, aboard the
  Antarctic,   exploring the Pacific for opportunities
for American trade, commented,   "Although the
Auckland Islands once abounded with numerous herds of fur
and hair seals [sea lions], the American and English seamen
engaged in this business have made such clean work of it as
scarcely to leave a breed."    
    It was to be Morrell 's otherwise glowing report,
together with those of a series of scientific expeditions to
the group during the early 1840s, that contributed to the most
forlorn episode of human endeavour on the islands: the
ill-fated Hardwicke Settlement.  
    Charles Enderby, concerned at the moribund state of
the English whaling industry in the middle of last
century, was looking for a way to revive it.   His plan, the
broad outline of which he published in a pamphlet, was to
colonise the Auckland Islands and set up a whaling station
there.  
    He could not have chosen a more unfortunate location.
  Not only was the   islands'   soil completely
unsuitable for cultivation, but the climate was
uncongenial to the point of misery, the surrounding seas
treacherous and the winds incessant, ferocious
and cold.  
    So why did Enderby choose such an unlikely spot?
  Fergus McLaren, an historian of the subantarctic region,
suggests that his choice   "was no 
  photo  
  caption  
doubt influenced by the fact that the group had been
discovered by an Enderby vessel"  .   However, it is
equally likely that he was swayed by favourable published
accounts of the islands which drastically overrated its
natural endowments.  
    Sir James Clark Ross, aware of Enderby 's proposals,
wrote,   "In the whole range of the vast Southern
Ocean, no spot could be found combining so completely the
essential requisites for a fixed whaling
station."     Morrell enthused similarly:
  "The quality of the soil in this island is
sufficiently indicated by the uniform luxuriance of all
its productions.   Were the forests cleared away, very
few spots would be found that could not be converted to
excellent pasturage or tillage land"  .   In
addition, he described the climate as   "mild,
temperate and salubrious"  .  
    D'Urville authoritatively described Port Ross as
one of the best harbours of refuge in the world, while one of
his officers, Dubouzet, recorded that   "If ever
the fine harbours of these islands should attract
colonists thither, Laurie 's harbour would be the most
suitable point for the town."    
    Thus supported by many advocates, which Enderby
substantially quoted in a second pamphlet focusing on the
island 's natural suitability for settlement, the British
Southern Whale Fishery Company became incorporated and
obtained the leases of the Auckland Islands.   The company 's
commissioner-in-residence was to be Charles Enderby himself,
who was also commissioned as Lieutenant-Governor of the
islands.  
    So it was that three vessels, the   Samuel
Enderby,   the   Fancy   and the   Brisk,  
departed from Plymouth in August, 1849, carrying with them all
the hopes and visions of a group of colonists, as well as the
future profitability of the English Southern Fishery.
  Their objective: to colonise and establish a prosperous
settlement, to act as a whaling base, refit and replenish
trading and whaling vessels and trade with the separate
colonies of Australia and New Zealand.  
    Young married couples and their children, regarded as
ideal settlers, were predominant amongst those on board.
  Bringing carpentry, engineering, masonry, mechanical,
agricultural, medical and clerical skills in addition to
those traditionally associated with whaling, these brave
colonists seemed well prepared to fulfil the company 's
objectives.  
    They were in for a shock.  
    First, on arrival in December 1849 they were greeted
by a group of Maori.   Enderby was greatly perturbed, as he
had assured the settlers that the island was   "free
from aborigines"  .   The Maori, and their Moriori
slaves, under the leadership of chief Matioro of the Ngati
Mutunga, having become restless at the lack of martial
conflict at home, conscious that their right to have slaves
was being threatened by the progress of Christianity and
fearing   illustration    caption   further
retaliation for their part in the   Jean Bart   massacre
at the Chatham Islands in 1839, established themselves at
Crozier Point at the entrance to Port Ross during 1842.  
    Second, they encountered an   "inhospitable
mixture of rock bluff, peat swamp and tangled scrub"  .
  In place of the pasture and woods of England was vegetable
mould, boggy ground and impenetrable forests.  
    Third, the formidable weather, as if annoyed at these
intruders, showed its worst traits:   "gales of wind and
perpetual rain"   in a southern summer must have seemed an
ominous introduction to their new home.  
    Despite the unpleasant welcome, the enterprise of
creating the settlement ashore was tackled with
enthusiasm.   The town site was surveyed, land was
cleared for both building sites and cultivation.   Being
partially pre-built, the buildings to house the married
couples, the single men 's quarters, the zinc-covered
store  -  house, a workshop, chapel and the large
governor 's residence soon became visible.  
    To the Maori population, who in the preceding six
years had endured deprivation, hardship and internal frictions
(a second settlement being established on Enderby Island), the
prospect of a whaling station must have suggested
opportunities to prosper.   A number of men quickly got
themselves onto the company payroll as boatmen, labourers and
gardeners.  
    At the outset Enderby appointed the two Maori chiefs,
Matioro and Ngatere, special constables, a role which they
fulfilled enthusiastically.   The two groups coexisted in
relative harmony, the only real problems relating to the
association of Maori women with seamen, and drunkenness -
the universal vice in most fledgling Australasian
settlements.  
    Special celebrations were held on New Year 's Day,
1850, when the settlement at Erebus Cove was formally
named Hardwicke, after the Earl of Hardwicke, Governor of the
Southern Whale Fishing Company.  
    With the whaling season pending - the whales came into
the eastern bays to calve during the months of April and May -
the settlers assembled a cutter, while at the same time
proceeding with building dwellings, establishing gardens and
exploring their new homeland.  
    Although early in March six vessels were at anchor
in the harbour, few foreign ships visited the
settlement   photo    illustration    caption  
for refit and replenishment during the first year of
settlement.   Furthermore, in spite of some sightings,
no whales were caught by the shore station, and the larger
vessels returned from longer voyages with very little oil.
  Perhaps seeing the writing on the wall, five married
couples and their families and three single men departed for
Sydney at the end of May.  
    Nevertheless, work in the colony continued
satisfactorily: a road was surveyed, and labourers began its
construction using gravel from the beach, and a four-gun
battery was installed.  
    The winter of 1850 was milder than the bitter weather
of summer had forecast, and Enderby visited New Zealand and
Australia to arrange for an adequate supply of goods.
  Livestock, including sheep, cattle and horses from Sydney,
maintained a good condition with little attention.   The
four acres of land cleared for cultivation was fenced with
stakes to afford protection against the westerly winds, with
further internal protection to give the vegetables every
care possible.   Even so, gardening was a largely futile
exercise: nothing could improve the fertility of the soil,
and the settlement 's vegetables were pitiable - potatoes
the size of marbles, turnips - like   "miserable
radishes"  .   Only their 
  photo    caption    photo  
Maori neighbours seemed to have any success with the soil, and
augmented the imported stores with locally grown
produce.    
  On Enderby 's return to Hardwicke in September, whales
began to appear in the waters around the islands, but the
shore whaling continued to be a complete failure.   Morale
plummeted and tempers rose.   Enderby 's dual role as
both company and government representative, coupled with
his idealistic fervour, fueled an undercurrent of
dissatisfaction amongst the colonists.   His imposition
of   "pettifogging restrictions"   on the
  whalers'   and   settlers'   wilder spirits lent
him to be dubbed as both   "law maker and law
breaker"  .   It took the more practical assistant
commissioner, William Mackworth, to mediate between
Enderby and the colonists.  
    To help keep the peace, a jail was built on Shoe
Island, in the harbour, and saw constant use.   After the
retrieval of the chief surgeon, Mr J.S. Rodd, from the
waters near the jetty in a state of violent intoxication, and
his subsequent confinement there, the jail was named Rodd 's
Castle.   Mackworth 's private diary testifies to the
necessity for the jail.   On sentencing seven men to be
confined there, he writes that   "the difficulty of
supporting discipline in this Port is
extreme."     The two most common convictions
were intoxication and refusal of duty.  
    Towards the end of 1850, Sir George Grey paid a
friendly visit to the colony and stayed a week.   Grey was
pessimistic about the settlement 's future, despite
Enderby 's energy and the   colonists'   general
well  -  being creating a favourable impression.  
    A public holiday was declared on December 4 to
commemorate the settlement 's first anniversary.   A
regatta was held - in driving rain - but the year must have
ended in bleak resignation.  
      T  HE NEW YEAR saw the
arrival of three more company whaling ships, bringing the
total to eight.   Despite correspondence from the London
directors of the company expressing anxiety about the
venture, Enderby remained optimistic.   He continued to
spend the company 's capital on improving the buildings and
increasing the livestock population.  
    Much of the grazing for farm animals was found on
Enderby Island.   Enjoying a sunnier climate than that of
the main Auckland Island, grass growth was more rapid there.
  In addition, the sheltered beach at Sandy Bay on the
island was used by the Enderby settlers for recreation and
picnics.   Such was the harshness of conditions confronting
the settlers that Mackworth organised a roster for families to
spend a   "week at a time there"   in order that
they benefit from the change of air.  
    In the middle of 1851, with no improvement in
whaling fortunes, the company 's directors decided to send two
special commissioners to investigate matters.   By this
time &pound;30,000 of   shareholders'   funds
had been spent on 
  photo  
  caption  
developing the settlement and procuring and outfitting
whaling vessels, for the paltry return of just
&pound;3000 in the first year.  
    So it was that on December 18, 1851, George Dundas
M.P. and Thomas Preston, the company 's secretory, arrived
at Port Ross aboard the   Chieftain  .  
    Differences between Enderby and the special
commissioners soon emerged.   Undoubtedly, Enderby had
misled the directors (in one despatch he claimed   "the
cabbages and potatoes to be of excellent quality, and the
Swedish turnips better than that of England"  ).
  When they found prospects for the community to be even
bleaker than they expected, they recommended the immediate
abandonment of the settlement.   Enderby, sensing his
own demise, began to pursue protracted litigation
involving the company and the Colonial Office, even
sailing for New Zealand to vindicate his own actions and have
those of Dundas and Preston condemned.  
    In his absence, Mackworth supervised the
dismantling of Hardwicke.  
    The assistant surgeon, R.E. Malone, of the   HMS
Fantome,   a vessel sent to prevent trouble breaking
out at the settlement 's disbandment, gives an account of its
appearance:  
        "The settlement consisted of a large house
for the governor, a zinc-covered store, a building for
unmarried servants of the company, and about 25 other
houses on a point of land at the entrance to Laurie
Harbour."      
    After writing scornfully of the gardens, Malone
comments:       "We got a few eggs occasionally from
the settlers at 2s a dozen&semi; and the company charged us 7d
a pound for beef, and 9d for fed pork&semi; the former was bad, and
the latter seldom to be had...      
        "While we were at the Aucklands in July 1852,
there were on the islands 123 crew of the "Fantome", 4
merchant seamen, prisoners on board her, 40 crew of merchant
vessels in port, 36 men, 22 women, 34 children, 20 Maori men,
17 Maori women, 10 Maori children.   In total
306."       (Malone does not distinguish between
Maori and Moriori).  
    Ironically, during this time the only whale to be
caught by the Hardwicke shore station was harpooned,
captured and 40 barrels of oil extracted.  
    On August 5, 1852,   "having seen the buildings
broken up, and shipped the men, women and children on board
the company 's vessels fairly at sea"   the
  Fantome   weighed anchor.   From the   Earl of
Hardwicke,   already at sea, Mackworth wrote in his
journal,     "The satisfaction I feel at this
moment is beyond description.   My miserable life at Port
Ross will never be forgotten."      
    The reasons for Hardwicke 's failure are many, but
unquestionably the scarcity of whales and the
unpreparedness of the English whalers for extended
voyages in subantarctic waters were key factors.   When
to these are added a dismal climate, Enderby 's obdurate
personality and an infertile soil, then it is understandable
that many settlers preferred to try their luck on the
Victorian goldfields rather than endure prolonged
deprivation on the Auckland Islands.  
    By the time the colonists who did not choose to settle
in Australia reached England, the company was in liquidation.
  Enderby never regained his former stature and died
unnoticed in 1876.  
    In his formal role on the islands he had recorded the
births of 16 infants, officiated at five marriages and
conducted four funeral services: two of these deaths were
of very young babies.   Today it is the graveyard which
bears sole witness to the existence of this futile attempt at
settling.   Thirty-two months of misplaced enthusiasm
amount to a memorial to death in these islands of despair.  
    The Polynesians who welcomed and farewelled their
European counterparts left in two stages.   Matioro,
together with his followers and slaves, left for Stewart
Island during 1854, while it was not until 1856 that relatives
on the Chathams of those still stranded chartered a vessel to
bring them back.   They took their dead with them,
leaving behind a few flax bushes as their only
legacy.  
      O  VER THE NEXT half
century, in contrast to the previous inhabitants, the
islands received a steady influx of involuntary exiles.  
    The first of these was the crew of the
  Grafton,   a schooner which had been chartered from
Sydney to look for tin deposits on Campbell Island, 290km
south-east of the Auckland Islands.   Not finding any tin,
the captain, Thomas Musgrave, proceeded to the Auckland
Islands to obtain what seal skins he could in order to offset
their expenses.   With him was a French adventurer, F.E.
Raynal, who had had responsibility for the prospecting,
and three others.  
    While anchored in the southern Carnley Harbour the
ship was caught 
  photos  
  caption  
in a violent hurricane, snapped one anchor chain, dragged the
other, and ran aground on the rocky coast.   All five hands
made the shore, taking with them provisions, personal
effects and the ship 's skiff.  
    The account of their 20-month sojourn is every bit
as exciting as   Robinson Crusoe  , and is told in two
fascinating books, one by Musgrave and the other by Raynal.
  Both were forced to write their journals in sea lion blood
after their ink ran out.  
    From the outset, the survivors showed breathtaking
ingenuity.   Presented with the problem of building a
fireplace and chimney for their proposed hut, Raynal
manufactured a crude mortar made from burnt shells and gravel.
  Liberally applying the mortar between stones collected
from the shore, he was able to build a chimney 15 feet high,
topped with a chimney pot fashioned from copper sheathing
stripped from the   Grafton   's hull.  
    The rest of the house, which measured 24 by 16
feet and had a pitched roof, was constructed from rata trunks,
canvas and tussock thatch.   It had a planked floor and
door, a table, benches, beds - even two glass windows
salvaged from the captain 's cabin.   Dubbed "Epigwaitt",
North American Indian for "near the great waters", the hut
served them well, and its remains are still visible today.  
    Throughout their exile the men lived on sea lion,
shag, certain plant roots, and mussels and fish when they
could get them.   Musgrave records their normal bill of
fare:     "Breakfast - Seal stewed down to soup, fried
roots, boiled seal or roast seal, with water.   Dinner -
Ditto ditto.   Supper - Ditto ditto.   This repeated 21
times per week...   The men have stood it bravely thus far,
but it grieves me unspeakably to hear them wishing for
things which they cannot get.   I heard one just now wishing
he had but a bucket of potato-peelings!"      
    Raynal 's inventiveness know no 
  photos  
  caption  
bounds.   After succeeding with mortar, he proceeded to
manufacture soap: by dripping water through the burnt ashes of
seaweed and pounded shells, he collected a strong alkali,
which, when boiled with sea lion oil, produced   "an
excellent soap, which was of inestimable value to us, both as
regarded health and cleanliness"  .  
    He then succeeded in making a beer distillery (but
abandoned the idea for fear of the damage alcohol might do to
their fragile community) and designing a process for tanning
sea lion skins.   This involved steeping the skins in a
solution of lime made from burnt mussel shells, so that all
oily residues were destroyed.   The skins were then washed,
stretched and cleaned before being plunged into a solution
containing the tannin derived from rata bark.  
    Having provided his companions with clothing, blankets
and footwear, Raynal produced amusements in the form of
solitaire, chess and cards, and he and Musgrave conducted
nightly school lessons, teaching the others to read and write.
  A pet parakeet, which they taught to talk, added to
their domesticity.  
    Despite their apparent comfort, as the weeks became
months, hope of rescue declined.   By year 's end the group
resolved to rebuild the   Grafton   's boat in order that
it voyage to the mainland.   With only an axe, an adze, a
hammer and a gimlet, and what he could salvage from the bones
of the   Grafton,   Raynal set about his masterwork: the
construction of a double-action sealskin forge bellows.
  Once he had completed this indispensable piece of
equipment, he began to manufacture tools and nails from
bolts and old iron.   Raynal describes the scene:  
        "The charcoal glowed and crackled&semi; and
the bellows, manoeuvred by Musgrave, gave forth a sonorous
roaring, which to our ears seemed the sweetest music in
the world...   Before the end of the month I had made three
pairs of pincers of different sizes, three punches, a mould
for nails, a pair of tongs, a cold chisel for cutting iron, a
large hammer for beating it, two smaller ones for forging
it, and a number of little articles of which I foresaw I
should stand in need."      
    Six months after building began, the   Rescue  
was ready.   Provisioned with seal meat and fresh water
stored in bladders, Musgrave, Raynal and one other lashed
themselves to the deck in sail-cloth cases and set sail on
their great voyage to salvation.  
    For five days they battled a south  -  west storm,
capsizing at least once, drinking a little water but unable to
eat as their roasted seal meat had   "turned
rank"  , until on July 24, 1865, they made landfall at
Port Adventure, Stewart Island.   There, while
recuperating, Musgrave became aware that he and his crew
were not the only castaways to have been living on the
island.  
    During the night of May 10, 1864, in a severe gale the
  Invercauld  , in ballast from Melbourne to Callao,
struck the north-west corner of the islands.   All but six
of the crew of 25 made it ashore, many being injured in the
process.  
    At daybreak, after a night huddled together to keep
warm, those who 
  caption  
  illustration  
were able went to the scene of the wreck to see what could be
salvaged.   A miserable few pounds of salted pork and some
sodden biscuits were divided equally amongst the crew, and
some timbers salvaged from which a shelter was erected.
  After four days, having depleted the adjacent
shellfish beds, they scaled the near perpendicular cliffs in
search of a more providential haven.   Several days and
deaths later, and with only water and roots for sustenance, 15
survivors reached the bay,   "where we found some
limpets on the rocks, of which we ate heartily.     We
also caught two seals and found them good
food.  "    
    Possessing neither the resources nor the leadership
that sustained the   Grafton   crew, the
  Invercauld   's men, thinking their chances of survival
would be better, divided into small groups.   Captain
Dalgarno wrote that     "After living three months
upon limpets, they got done, and all we had again were the
roots and water, seeing no more seals.   By the end of
August the only survivors were myself, the mate, and
Robert Holding, seaman... all very much
reduced."      
    In order to obtain a more consistent supply of
food, a primitive canoe of rata branches and sealskins was
constructed to transport them to Enderby Island.
      "Gradually we collected a sufficient
number of seal  -  skins to construct a little hut, like
the cabins of Eskimos&semi; but it protected us very imperfectly
against the continual rains and the severity of that
frightful climate."       They lived off rabbits
and seal flesh.   The three
survivors   photos    caption   were rescued
after twelve months and 10 days when they saw the Portuguese
ship   Julian   entering Port Ross, with the misguided
hope that her serious leaks could be repaired at
Hardwicke.  
    In New Zealand, Musgrave appealed to official
sources to rescue his two crew still at Carnley Harbour.
  He was turned down, but succeeded in winning the support
of the people of Invercargill.   Their sponsorship enabled
him to charter a local vessel, the   Flying Scud  , and
collect his men.   On their way home, they called in at Port
Ross, and there discovered the decomposing remains of a man in
an abandoned shack belonging to the Hardwicke settlement.
  By the body were some shells, a bottle of fresh water and
a slate covered in hieroglyphics, from which only the word
"James" could be deciphered.   Presumably, this was the
corpse of James Rigth, one of the   Invercauld   crew
who had earlier separated from 
  photos  
  captions  
Dalgarno.  
      It was at Musgrave 's urging that the state
governments of Victoria and New South Wales, as well as the
Southland Provincial Government, recognised that the problem
of shipwrecks in the subantarctic was an official
responsibility.   Late in 1865, both the   Victoria  
and   Southland   searched the island groups for
castaways.   These two vessels had scarcely returned
from the Auckland Islands before the most celebrated wreck to
occur there happened.  
      Travelling from Melbourne with 83 passengers and
crew, and carrying some 2500 ounces of gold for the Bank of
New South Wales, the   General Grant  , a 1200-tonne
three-masted barque, sighted land on the night of May 13,
1866.   The captain tried to steer between Disappointment
Island and the main island, but at the crucial moment the
wind fell, leaving the vessel to the mercy of the strong
currents that flow around that precipitous
coast.      

  

        gleeson 's ghosts    
    In their day, Auckland 's old pubs were among the
grandest buildings in town, their corner sites provoking
architects into flights of decorative fancy which still make
passers-by look twice.   Many were demolished in the last
two decades when our drinking habits changed and although some
of the survivors are thriving, for others the writing is on
the wall.     PETER SHAW   cruises the
bars.  
    THE VICTORIAN CORNER pubs on the long western
ridge above Queen Street are some of the city 's oldest and
most distinctive buildings.   Driving up Hobson Street you
flash past the Albion, the Prince Arthur and the City.   In
Nelson Street the Empire stands resplendent.   In Albert
Street the Shakespeare beckons in lurid pink.   Tucked on
the corner of Victoria Street West and Federal Street is the
Aurora.   These are the survivors.  
    These old hotels have weathered enormous changes in
  Aucklanders'   social habits.   They were built at a
time when the law obliged those selling liquor to provide
accommodation: you couldn't get a liquor licence unless
you provided beds for the night.  
    From the 1850s onwards the hotel trade prospered as
adventurous pioneers arrived in Auckland ready to live it up
in the city before moving down country for the real work.
  The hotel became the focus for social and public
gatherings - even some of the first temperance meetings were
held in hotels.   By 1870, Auckland had 91 licensed hotels
serving a population of 13,000, ie one hotel to 143 people
compared to 1982 's ratio of one to 13,500.  
    By the 1880s the city had prospered and the design of
hotels became more and more elaborate.   Outside the city,
they were still built in weatherboard and enclosed with large
verandahs - the Brian Boru in Thames is a classic example -
and in Auckland architects began to echo the grandeur of the
English Victorian hotel, smothering brick and plaster
exteriors with finials, elaborate cornices and a riot of
differently shaped windows all on the same building.  
  photo  
  photo  
    BUT THE PROHIBITION movement was growing in
strength and in 1881 lobbying had forced changes to the
licensing laws.   Now, licences were no longer to be
automatically renewed.  
    In the ensuing years many hotels lost their licences
altogether and fewer and fewer new ones were built.
  Standards in many old hotels declined while social
pressure against the sale of liquor increased.   The
industry lost confidence&semi; entertainment in hotels ceased&semi;
bylaws prohibited the local sale of liquor&semi; bottle stores were
closed down.  
    The temperance movement 's greatest triumph occurred in
1919 when 49.7 per cent of the electorate voted for
prohibition.   But the death blow to the old-style hotel
had already been struck two years earlier when, as a temporary
wartime measure, six o'clock closing was introduced.
  Incredibly, it was to remain in force until 1967.  
  caption  
  photo  
    THE CITY'S OLD hotels were butchered&semi; pleasant
home-like lounges, dining rooms and bedrooms were ripped out
to create beer troughs where swillers could pack themselves in
front of long bar counters designed for quick service.
  Only a few bedrooms were kept in order to fulfil the
licensing requirement.  
    After World War II the introduction of bulk storage
beer systems and plastic tubing allowed beer to be pumped
straight into the glass.   Service became even faster.  
    The poet A. R. D. Fairburn, no stranger to the glass,
was moved to comment that   "walking into some of our
city bars, the stranger from abroad might be forgiven for
wondering how long it will be before a complete circular
system of beer drinking is introduced, the pumping apparatus
on the bar being connected up to the urinal on the rear
wall"  .  
    The appeal of prohibition diminished rapidly during
the 20s&semi; the unforeseen negative consequences of six o'clock
closing were to be just as significant.
  Architecturally, the pub lost sight of its heritage
and uncivilised behaviour became the accepted norm: the
convivial pub atmosphere conducive to social drinking
evaporated in favour of an emphasis on rapid dispensing and
consumption.  
    Gradually, as a result of these profound social
changes, a myth grew up: it came to be believed that the New
Zealand pub was a place where social barriers came down, where
men of different colour, creed and social standing could
congregate on equal terms.  
    Rob MacGregor, author of a book with the rather
laboured title of   Around New Zealand In Eighty
Beers  , observed that   "the Kiwi pub is a centre
where the working man can condemn the rich and the rich can
condemn the rich and everyone can condemn the breweries.
    There is so much freedom of speech in a New Zealand
hotel that many an overseas visitor has gone home thinking
that New Zealand pub patrons are Nazis, Communists, saboteurs,
wife beaters and horse racing promoters, not forgetting
Members of Parliament, income tax inspectors and film
stars.  "    
    But the atmosphere of an apparent happy equality could
all too easily become charged with an ugly and extremely
volatile intolerance should a man declare that he was a
homosexual, an academic, a conscientious objector - or worse,
that he preferred sherry to beer.  
    In 1961, tavern licences were introduced, ending
the need for unprofitable accommodation units.   A second
period of interior butchery began as entire internal layouts
were removed and refitted to cater for the new profit-oriented
methods of bar operation.   Finally, in 1967, came the
return of 10 o'clock closing.  
    The "booze barn" emerged as the new hotel form as the
breweries attempted to cash in on the new-found freedoms of
late-night drinking and entertainment.   The city 's old
Victorian hotels were now an anachronism and were again
"upgraded" as huge lounge bars were grafted on to existing
premises.  
    The 1962 Sale of Liquor Act entrusted the
administration of matters to do with licensed premises to the
Licensing Control Commission, a body of four persons
recommended by the minister of justice and appointed by the
governor general.   They presided over a decade of dramatic
changes with special licences granted to restaurants,
theatres, cabarets, airports and even passenger trains.   It
seemed as though drinking might yet become a sophisticated
social pleasure again.  
    Throughout the 1970s, hotel renovation and
refurbishment continued, with Lion Breweries pioneering the
successful pseudo-colonial Cobb and Co restaurant chain in an
attempt to bring the family back into the pub.  
    Bistro bars and other food services appeared in
bars, including the Victorian hotels, as did bands and other
forms of entertainment.   Garden bars, saloon bars and
restaurant bars were established as the hotel industry tried
to beat the competition from the new licensed clubs. 
  photo  
  caption  
  Gradually, specialised bars began to encourage social
segregation&semi; the so-called "great leveller", the public bar, a
remnant from the days of the six o'clock swill, ceased to have
its former appeal.  
    Because the hotel industry was controlled by
monopolising breweries, a ghastly standardisation had
destroyed any feeble remnants of individuality in matters of
decor.   Some hotels, struggling for an identity, sent
experts to England to analyse English pubs, which they
then copied here with often ludicrous results.   Others
broke out in a rash of lime and coffee-coloured paint,
striated plywood, chrome furniture and fluorescent
lighting.  
    Now that the old egalitarian myth has become less
potent, the pub has become increasingly socially stratified.
  Even within individual pubs, class segregation occurs.
  Today, a tour of the old Victorian pubs on the Hobson
Street ridge reveals that another social revolution is
underway.   Some of them, like DB 's Aurora and Prince
Arthur, are barely keeping up&semi; others like the Empire, the
Shakespeare and the Albion are flourishing.    
    THE SHAKESPEARE on the corner of Albert and
Wyndham Streets is the work of the well-known architect Thomas
Mahoney.   He designed the hotel for publican Thomas Foley
whose parents had owned the old wooden Shakespeare Hotel
formerly on the same site.   The new hotel was built in
1898, taking six months instead of the projected four because
the builders had to send to Melbourne for more bricks.  
    According to a long description of the hotel in
  Industries Of New Zealand  , published in the same
year, the Shakespeare offered its guests   "every
convenience compatible with a first-class hostelry... the most
carping critic would find it a difficult matter to place his
finger on a fault of omission or commission in the general
furnishing and   menage   of the
establishment"  .  
    The large dining room on the second floor seated 50
guests at large or small   tete-a-tete   tables&semi;
different dishes were conveyed from the kitchen below by a
dumb waiter.   There were a number of drawing rooms, the
finest of which was also on the 
  photo  
  photo  
  caption  
second floor and was furnished in light blue plush and the
walls draped with a neutral tint to give a bright and cheerful
appearance.   A handsome Brinsmead piano stood in one corner
and easy chairs were scattered about.  
    There were over 20 single and double bedrooms finished
with pretty dressing tables and chests of drawers.   The
main entrance of the hotel was on Albert Street so guests
could proceed to their apartments   "without passing
through, or in proximity to, the bar.     This is an
excellent arrangement for ladies and families.  "  
  The magnificent wooden staircase, the work of a Mr
Fairweather, was handsomely balustraded in polished kauri
and lit with a large stained-glass window.   The private bar
was also kauri-lined to distinguish it from the "assembly
room".  
    Today the staircase is painted over, though the
original stained-glass window is still in place.   There are
no bedrooms or formal dining rooms now: the many regular
patrons are attracted above all by the ales and lagers brewed
on the premises.   There 's King Lear Old Ale, Macbeth 's Red
Ale, Falstaff 's Red Ale, Willpower Stout and Barraclough 's
Lager - the last named after the hotel 's current owner Peter
Barraclough, a former DB man who used to run the Junction in
Thames.  
    Manager Brett Kennedy says that the hotel aims to
satisfy the needs of three different clienteles: the
workers from nearby construction sites go down to the
basement 's Avon Bar&semi; at street level there 's Hathaway 's for
  "anyone and everyone"  , while upstairs the
lounge bar offers a more restful environment for business
people during the day, although at night it resounds to music
from Al Hunter or Beaver, among others.   Until quite
recently, Hathaway 's used to be an old-style public bar, but
in order to defeat the connotation of violence and boorish
behaviour associated with such places, it has been turned
into a brasserie.  
    Young lunchtime patrons of Hathaway 's delightedly
exhibit their ample paunches and tell you how devoted they are
to the beer served at the Shakespeare, claiming that it is
impossible to be hung over after drinking it.  
    Tourists interested in brewing also flock into the
Shakespeare where they can watch the whole process taking
place.  
    THE AURORA on the corner of Federal Street and
Victoria Street West is now a DB hotel.   In 1905 the
well-known publican Paddy Gleeson demolished the old wooden
Aurora Tavern, which was first licensed in 1852, and built a
new Aurora in the highest Edwardian Baroque style.   Its
many decorative features are conspicuous today, having been
rather vulgarly picked out in white against a grim
charcoal-coloured background.  
    Paddy Gleeson was born in Tipperary, Ireland, in 1839,
but by the age of 14 he had arrived in Australia where he is
said to have fought in the battle of Eureka Stockade at
Ballarat.   After working in various goldfields, he came to
New Zealand, settling first in New Plymouth then
Auckland, where he remained until his death in 1916.  
    His first hotel was the Albion, built in 1864, which
was followed by Gleeson 's (now drastically altered and known
as the Bridgeway Tavern) in 1880, then the Prince Arthur, the
City and finally the Aurora.   A great character, Gleeson
always led the annual St Patrick 's Day Parade in the Domain
mounted on a horse and wearing grey morning dress.   Some
years before his death he gave the Aurora to his daughter
Catherine as a wedding present
  photo   
and it remained in the family into the early 1970s.  
    The Aurora is in a sad state today, like the Prince
Arthur, also now a DB hotel, the walls of its public bar are a
nicotine-stained dirty cream colour and decorated with greatly
enlarged, out-of-focus rugby photographs left over from the
era of six o'clock closing.   In one corner a waitress
smears sliced white bread with canned sweet corn in readiness
for the toasted sandwich machine.   In the kitchen out the
back a bath of fat bubbles efficiently, providing chips to go
with the beers.   There is a steady stream of traffic from
the TAB located through a door in the public bar.   The holy
trinity of rugby, racing and beer lives on.  
    The Aurora 's two upper floors are almost derelict
except for a thin layer of white paint which has been splashed
along one corridor where a few staff members have their rooms.
  The top floor is unfit for human habitation and there
appear to be no plans to make it so.  
    THE PRINCE ARTHUR, on the corner of Hobson Street
and Wellesley Street, may have two satellite discs on the
roof, but things are little better there.   Although this
hotel has the most elegant facade of all Auckland 's Victorian
pubs, the DB image of 20 years ago dominates the interior.
  The carpet is a coloured floral, the entrance a nasty
combination of orange/red and murky chocolate brown.  
    Upstairs is Keith 's Bar which has a large video screen
at one end and offers a variety of foods including
  "Eggs and Chips, Sausages, Onions, Tomatoes, and
Oysters when available"  .   The public bar at 11.30am
on a Wednesday morning is a desolate scene of old men in
windbreakers sitting smoking, alone and silent in
contemplation of their jugs of beer.   The radio blares
commercials.  
    As at the Aurora, the original layout upstairs remains
intact, with the difference that it is inhabited by
permanent residents and staff.   In 1969, patrons of the
hotel presented Mangere Hospital and Training School with a
new children 's bus bought with funds raised by
raffles.  
    THE ALBION, another of Paddy Gleeson 's hotels, is
directly across the road.   In 1973, when it was owned by
Consolidated Hotels and being transformed into a
four-storey, seven-bar booze barn, old regulars attested to
the fact that Paddy 's ghost was seen frequently about the
building.  
    Consolidated 's general manager, a Mr W. Dunlop, had a
praiseworthy attitude towards older hotels and regretted the
cannibalisation that had gone on during 
  photo  
  caption  
the six o'clock closing days.   He told the   Herald  
that although the Albion was   "sturdy but a bit run
down"  , it could become a genuine entertainment centre
again.     "People nowadays expect their pub to
provide more than just a drink,"   he said.
      "They look for a well-rounded night out, with
entertainment and perhaps dancing thrown in."      
    Dunlop went to England to look at the pub scene there
and came back convinced that the hotel should be refurbished
along traditional English lines.   Consolidated sought the
advice of Vic Jones, a British hotel expert from the London
firm Bass Charington, and hired him to come to Auckland
specifically to tear out the insides of the 90-year-old
pub and restore its Victorian character.  
  photo  
  photo  
  caption  
    The ground-floor Cottage Bar, modelled on an early
English taproom, is still there.   Its original windows were
pulled out and replaced by curved ones.   Heavy roof rafter
beams were installed after Jones did a deal with the harbour
board who supplied them cheaply from the old piles of Freyberg
Wharf.   The walls and ceiling were belaboured with plaster
to create the "authentic" Olde English atmosphere&semi; horse
brasses were festooned about the place.  
    There are still distinct remnants of this anglicising
phase, though on Tuesday nights now the Cottage Bar resounds
to the revels of Irish Night.   The spacious Buttery
restaurant downstairs, a popular lunch spot, also has some
Elizabethan touches which survive from the
  '  70s  '   "new look".  
    Peter Keen bought the hotel in July 1988, removed the
bars upstairs and turned the Albion back into a hotel again.
  A chippie by trade, he 's spent 20 years in the liquor
business and knows what he 's doing.   His building skills
came in handy when it came to demolishing the old bars and
replacing them with 20 clean, modernised rooms which are
now let at very reasonable rates.   They are decorated in
soft pastel shades, a relief from the oppressive,
predominantly wine-coloured decor of the stairs and
corridors.  
    Keen picks up tourists from the airport, and many of
them keep coming back at various points in their travels
around the country.   People visiting Auckland on training
courses also like the hotel 's chatty, welcoming
atmosphere: Keen aimed at a 70 per cent occupancy rate but has
found that it rarely falls below 80 per cent.  
    THE CITY HOTEL further down Hobson Street has
just come through a very bad patch.   Long associated with
crime, drunkenness and violence, it hit the headlines
earlier this year when there was a vicious murder in the car
park adjoining the hotel.  
    The big corner bar has recently been revamped into the
Soho Bar, where amid palms, wooden garden furniture, black
walls and calico curtains you can chat to the interesting
foreigners who drift down from the Globetrotter
  backpackers'   accommodation on the two floors
above: in the evenings you can see the likes of Hammond
Gamble or Mike Farrell perform.   The old public bar doesn't
have a very savoury reputation and will shortly be changed
into a private bar.  
    Manager Matthew Williams used to work at the Empire
along the road.   He says that the Soho Bar doesn't intend
to 
  photo  
  caption  
compete with its up-market rival.     "We 're not in
the same league,"   he says.     "  For one
thing, our prices are cheaper.   Auckland 's bar scene is
tired and monotonous.   We want to attract the TV people
back again, too."      
    THE EMPIRE has probably had the best luck of all
the city 's Victorian hotels.   In 1982 Simon Woolley bought
it from Hancocks and transformed it into a place where the
young well-heeled were happy to eat and be seen.   Then he
sold it to partners Kevin and Tom Lane and Bill Boyd, who also
own and operate the Exchange in Parnell.   Last year the
already architecturally unrestrained Empire was repainted in a
fashion which comes close to gilding the lily.  
    Its interior has been reorganised by promotions
manager Myles Van Urk, who has assembled an enormous display
of sporting and musical memorabilia including Grant Fox 's
boots, Chris Lewis 's 1983 Wimbledon racquet, Martin Crowe 's
one-day cricket gear and Alison Roe 's shoes and medal from the
1981 Boston marathon.   There 's a dress worn by Madonna,
Annie Lennox 's flaming red bra and an entire wall of guitars
played and signed by visiting musical luminaries.  
    The Empire has a well-dressed lunchtime clientele,
many of them from across the road at TVNZ.   Ginette
McDonald recently lunched there in company on two
successive days (soda water with straw, salad and Winfields),
while PR princess Angela Griffen and her no less high-profile
business partner Catherine Saunders frequently repair to a
table to power lunch and consume their habitual bottle of
Vidal 's Chardonnay.  
    The Empire 's owners believe in keeping their
night-time patrons constantly amused with a range of
special-theme occasions - like a Crazy Shorts Party each
Christmas and, most recently, on Wednesday nights, a
Bigger Than Texas evening when Steinlager is $2.50 and the
men win prizes for riding a mechanical bull, Texas-style.
  Currently there are plans to turn the entire top floor of
the hotel into a new bar and a restaurant of the
brasserie/grill variety.  
    Those who know and love these old Victorian corner
pubs need no convincing of their unique place in Auckland 's
social and architectural history.   Like so many other
buildings of the same era now gone forever, they are part of
the city 's memory.   Some, like the Empire and the Albion,
will make the transition into the 1990s easily&semi; the fate of
others is less certain.  
    The Leopard in Freeman 's Bay has undergone a refit
and just reopened as the Spotty Dog.   Already the Queen 's
Head in Queen Street has been swallowed up in a tower-block
development of unparalleled vulgarity&semi; the Alexandra in
Federal Street is about to suffer a similar though, one hopes,
less crass fate.   These buildings may be smaller and less
impressive than the Civic Theatre or the Auckland City Art
Gallery, but their loss would be just as
crucial.    
  

      Waitangi    
    Most parts of New Zealand that were major ports in
the 1840s and 1850s have long since buried their raw, colonial
character under tons of asphalt, concrete, steel and plate
glass.   Not so Waitangi, Chatham Island, which still looks
astonishingly as it did in the mid-nineteenth century: a
cluster of buildings on the foreshore and a hotel on the site
where one has stood for more than 130 years.  
    True, there are more amenities now than previously.
  A solid wharf pushes into the bay off Hanson Point.
  And the plateau above the beach is dotted with a general
store, a post office, a community hall, a county office and a
cluster of houses.   But the rawness remains.   There is
space between the buildings, there are no advertising
hordings, people appear and disappear in twos and threes, and
the smell of salt, seaweed and fish still wafts up strongly
from the shore.  
    At the time of the Ati Awa invasion Waitangi was a
Moriori village known as Waiteki.   It was one of the first
communities to be coveted and taken over by the Maori
colonists.   They Maorified the name to Waitangi and -
according to Alexander Shand 's informants - laid out the
Moriori inhabitants along the beach,   'in length over a
quarter of a mile ... they were ... touching one another, the
parent and the child ...     Some of the women with stakes
thrust into them were left to die in their
misery.  '    
    This massacre, by which Ngati Tama asserted their
right of ownership by conquest, had a curious sequel.   Four
years later, Richard Cropping, a whaler, observed a London
surgeon from another visiting ship going to Waitangi beach
each day with, 
    an assistant, a small hammer and a bag, knocking
the teeth out of the numerous skulls laying about the beach,
belonging to the original islanders.     I have often
thought while watching them, that some English beauty might
some time be praised for her beautiful teeth at the expense of
some of the poor Chatham Islanders ...        
    Between the conquest and Cropping 's visit, Waitangi
had again changed hands.   The Ngati Tama village there had
been bombarded and razed by the crew of a French warship,
  Heroine  , in retaliation for the loss of the
  Jean Bart  .   Then, because Waitangi was favoured
by visiting ships as a watering and provisioning stop (the
soil behind the beach was extensive and well suited to growing
potatoes), Ngati Mutunga from Whangaroa attacked the
reconstructed village and drove Ngati Tama out.  
    Pomare, the principal Ngati Mutunga chief, then
commenced to  'sell' Chatham Island to the New Zealand Company
agents who had arrived on a buying mission while the fighting
was in progress (the sale was eventually disallowed by the New
Zealand Government and the Chathams were proclaimed part of
New Zealand in 1842).  
    Richard Cropping had arrived at Waitangi for the
second time in mid-1840, on the whaler   Endeavour:  
      A change had come over the scene since my
last visit to Chatham Islands for then you could buy a
boatload of potatoes for a few pounds of tobacco and a large
pig for a common shirt and the natives after you all day to
buy&semi; but now they did not care to barter at all.   The
reason was a short time previous to our arrival there had been
a barque, the   Cuba,   from London come to buy
the island ...   The barque had brought everything that was
likely to take the   natives'   eye: Guns of all
descriptions from old brown Bess to the fanciful double
barrel, pistols of all kinds, accordions, flutinas,
  Jews'   harps, violins, powder in any quantity, clothes,
rum, brandy, wines and all and everything you could mention.
  It was ludicrous in the extreme to see the Maoris, men,
women and children dressed in all kinds of styles, if such
could be called style.   Topboots, white bell-toppers,
frock-coats, vests, white shirts and other kinds of rig and in
all imaginable ways that would have put Beau Brummell in a fix
if he could have seen them.   In the warries [whares] were
any amount of barrels of powder, as many as ten or twenty in
some, with the Maoris sitting smoking all kinds of fancy pipes
and playing on all kinds of instruments ...      
  This year, 1840, may have seen the peak of   ships'  
visits to Waitangi (as many as 50 vessels are believed to have
called).   This was by no means the end of maritime traffic
to and from the port, however.   Within a few
years  photo   
  caption  
  caption    drawing  
Ngati Mutunga were growing potatoes on an even larger scale
than before, and wheat.   They exported huge quantities of
this produce to the New Zealand mainland, to Australia, and
even to California.   An estimated 8000 tonnes of potatoes
were shipped from the Chathams between 1845 and 1856&semi; and
between 1856 and 1858 vessels took an average of 1280 tonnes
of potatoes and 770 bushels of wheat per year.   More than
half of these quantities were grown around and shipped from
Waitangi.  
    Income from these sales was used to buy printed cloth,
clothing, flour, rice, tea, sugar, spiritous liquor
(especially rum) and horses.   The horse buying, breeding
and racing on the island became highly competitive, led by the
Waitangi chiefs Pomare, who died in 1851, and his son Wiremu
Naera.   For all these touches that could have been regarded
as luxuries, however, the inhabitants of the settlement
continued to live in ponga whares.   There were, as yet, no
grand houses on the Chathams.  
    By the late 1850s this era of relative prosperity was
waning.   The appointment of a resident magistrate in 1855
meant that goods landed on the island were now subject to
duty, which made trading there a less appealing prospect than
it had been previously.   In addition, Moriori slaves, who
had done most of the potato cultivation for their Maori
masters, were  photo   
  caption  
being progressively released.   And Frederick Hunt on Pitt
was attracting much of the whaling trade by advertising in
American publications and remaining outside of customs
surveillance by virtue of his isolation.  
    Ships continued to call at Waitangi, however, albeit
in smaller numbers.   The island 's first hotel, owned by the
chief Toenga Te Poki, opened on the beach in the early 1860s.
  The loss of sporadic trade was compensated for by the slow
growth in the number of European settlers, and by an increase
in visitors from the mainland.   One such visitor, Henry
Travers, reported in 1864:
      Waitangi is the chief ... settlement on the
Chatham Islands, and is situated at the south  -  eastern
extremity of Petre Bay, which forms an indentation some forty
miles broad on the south-west side of the island ...   A
small but deep river flows into the bay close to Waitangi,
washing on its western side the foot of some low ridges of
reddish sandstone.   The river drains a considerable tract
of hilly ground on the south side of the bay and is also fed
by a stream running from a lagoon close to the settlement.
  Were it not for a bar at its mouth, vessels from forty to
fifty tons burthen might enter it, as inside the bar the water
is deep for a considerable distance inland.
  The huts of the Maoris and the residence of Captain
Thomas [second magistrate] are situated on low ground on the
east side of the river.   The Maori huts are built of fern
posts lashed together with supplejacks, and thatched with toi
grass, resembling in all respects those found in the old pahs
in New Zealand.   Captain Thomas 's residence is built in the
same way with the exception of the roof, which is shingled&semi;
but it is plastered inside and out with clay, and whitewashed.
  A chapel belonging to the Church of England natives is a
very handsome specimen of their style of building: the inside
walls are lined with fronds of tree ferns, from which the
pinnules have been stripped, and which are interwoven in a
curious manner with leaves of Phormium tenax [flax].   The
roof is braced with board having white scrolls painted on a
red ground.   The outside walls and roof are closely and
smoothly thatched with toi grass.   The building is about
fifty feet long and nearly thirty broad, and about the same
height to the top of the roof.   There is a smaller building
used as a church by the Roman Catholic natives, built in the
same style, but more highly decorated and more neatly
kept.
  The population of Waitangi, including a few Moriori
slaves, numbers about one hundred  photo   
  caption  
and fifty all told.   Their huts are surrounded by
well-fenced paddocks, laid down to English grasses, but now
almost smothered by the common daisy, mustard, and dock, which
are spreading rapidly over the whole island.   The natives
generally possess considerable numbers of horses, cattle, and
pigs, which run, in common, on the open lands and in the bush.
  They cultivate large quantities of potatoes, maize,
pumpkins, and onions, which they supply to American whaling
ships resorting to the islands, and occasionally export to New
Zealand ...        
    The picture presented is something of an idyll, and it is
scarcely surprising that the likes of the Ritchies, Edward
Chudleigh, Walter Hood and Charlie Kerr were drawn to settle
on the island over the next few years.   What was less than
idyllic, however, was the fact that Captain Thomas returned
from a visit to the mainland in 1866 with 43 Maori 'prisoners
of war' - plus 25   prisoners'   wives and children and a
guard of 26 men.   More prisoners arrived by the end of the
year.   Chatham Island was being turned into a penal
colony.  
    At first the presence of the prisoners had little
adverse effect on island life.   They built a redoubt and a
prison, and huts for their own accommodation.   They began
to work for the settler farmers, hewing out roads, drains and
wells.   The guards, meanwhile, became part of local life,
visited the hotel for entertainment and refreshment, and tried
to court the local ladies.   One of them, immeasurably
bored, contributed this verse to the short-lived   Chatham
Island Chronicle.  
        Chathams land of milk and honey,
  Gold and silver (coined money),
  Land of bushes, swamps and mountains,
  Splendid bridges&semi; but no fountains ...
  When evening steals its veils of grey
  Across the sun 's declining ray
  I wander forth to take the air
  On Chatham 's lovely maids to stare,
  Such sweet and dear angelic creatures
  With snuff and butter color 'd features.
  Approach them with a grace so gay,
  They sneer and korero 'Aue'.
  My heart turns from them with a sigh
  To where my native country lie,
  No dusky form roams o'er her plains
  Nor is there Hau-Hau there in chains
...        
    By 1868, there were signs that the prisoners were
deeply discontented with their lot.   Some, like Te Kooti
Rikirangi, who had become their spiritual leader, had been
arrested unfairly (the accusation was that they were 'Hauhau'
- a generic term to condemn any Maori believed to have taken
up arms against the New Zealand Government).   The remainder
were influenced by him and began to cease their cooperation
with the authorities: breaking the tools with which they
were supposed to be working, for example, and by taking an
inordinately long time to complete work.    photos  
  captions  
    Their opportunity to escape came after the Government
recalled most of the guard to put down a suspected Fenian
uprising on the West Coast of the South Island.   In July
1868, Te Kooti sent for the prisoners working on outlying
farms.   They took over the redoubt and tied up the guards,
killing one in the scuffle.   Then they went through the
settlement, seizing guns, money, clothes and other items they
thought might aid their survival on the mainland.   Mrs
Alexander, wife of the proprietor of Mangoutu House, showed
great presence of mind by seizing the hotel 's hoard of 300
sovereigns and hurling them into a kettle of boiling water,
where they were not discovered.  
    Meanwhile another group of prisoners seized the vessel
  Rifleman  , then under charter to Walter Hood, put its
passengers ashore, and forced the crew to transport the
convicts to the East Coast of the North Island, where they
began a guerilla war against Government forces that lasted
another four years.    photo  
  caption  
    In the same year, most of the remainder of Chatham
Island 's Maori population also returned to the mainland, to
establish their rights to ancestral lands at court sittings in
Taranaki.   In 1869, for the first time, the European
population of the island (120) was larger than that of Maori
and Moriori combined.   And it was to remain so for another
40 years.  
    In 1870, however, some of the Maori began to trickle
back, for much the same reason they had left: Native Land
Court sittings were to determine ownership of the Chatham
Islands.   Preliminary hearings in 1868 had begun to deal
with European claims, but the court found that scarcely any
Pakeha held what could be considered correct title, and
ordered extensive surveying.  
    By 1870 the major surveys were complete and hearings
began on 14 June in the courthouse on Waitangi beach.   The
building was exceedingly small (four by six metres) and the
judge ordered the construction of a temporary shelter outside
to accommodate spectators and waiting witnesses.  
    For the next ten days the major question - who owned
the Chatham Islands - was argued out by Maori and Moriori
witnesses.   The outcome was a rout for the Moriori.
  Judge Rogan found in favour of the Ngati Tama and Ngati
Mutunga proposition that the Maori owned the Chatham Islands
by right of conquest.  
    He awarded 58,517 hectares of land on Chatham to the
Maori claimants (97 per cent) and 1,640 to the Moriori in
eight small reserves.   In almost every case the Maori
retained the land with extensive 'clears' that was suitable
for grazing and leasing.   Much of the Moriori reserves was
forested or wetlands.   In subsequent decisions, the
offshore islands with their precious birding rights were also
awarded to Maori claimants.  
    While much of the Maori land was to be leased to
Europeans, this securing of title gave Chatham Islands Maori a
renewed interest in their holdings and many families returned
to live there in the following decades, rebuilding the
island 's depleted Maori presence.  
    Meanwhile European-inspired development of the
island continued at an accelerated pace.   Prices for wool
were high on the mainland, and farmers  photo   
  caption  
and traders such as Walter Hood and Thomas Ritchie were adding
to the amenities and the recreational options available in
Waitangi.   Ritchie founded the Chatham Islands Jockey Club
in 1873 and later supervised the building of a race course to
the east of the village.   One hundred and sixteen years
later it was the oldest continuously operating racing club in
New Zealand.   Ritchie also initiated annual shooting
competitions on the western end of Waitangi beach.   Other
entrants decided early on that it was best to let Ritchie win,
because the subsequent shout at the pub would then be larger
and longer.  
    Walter Hood had chartered a number of vessels to trade
between the Chathams and the mainland, including the
  Rifleman   at the time of its seizure by Te Kooti.
  In 1882 he procured a 21 year lease of Pomare land
alongside the Nairn River and had William Baucke build him a
two-storeyed combined home and store from imported kauri.
  A visiting English bricklayer raised the chimneys.
  Once finished, in 1886, it was generally thought to be the
finest building on the island.   Hood too contributed to
sporting opportunities by releasing deer and black swans.
  The deer perished but the swans thrived.   He added
blackbirds, starlings and skylarks to the island 's bird
life.   photo     captions     photos     captions    
    Up to 1900, the loading and unloading of
vessels at Waitangi was a difficult and dangerous business,
with surfboats used to ferry goods between ship and shore.
  Things improved somewhat with the building of a jetty down
the western end of the beach in 1900.   David Holmes
described what was then possible:
      Sheep would be put into a race running along
one side of the jetty and loaded into the surfboat.   A
small rope sling was put around each animal in the boat and,
on arrival at the ship 's side, a rope attached to the ship 's
winch was threaded through these slings and the animals
hoisted aboard six or seven at a time.   Once in the hold,
they were penned and the slings removed.     SS Tees
  took 1300 sheep a trip and some chartered vessels 2000 or
more.   Fifty tons of cargo a day and 200 sheep an hour was
considered good going.
  The work of unloading and loading the ship generally
began at 5.30 a.m. and was carried on until finished,
sometimes into the early hours of the morning.   If it was
thought that the work would take two or three days to
complete, the hours were 5.30 a.m. to 9 or 10 p.m., conditions
permitting.   There were no smokos, but a one-hour break for
breakfast, dinner and tea ...        
    The big days on the island were the once or
twice-yearly arrival of the large steamers.   The Mangoutu
Hotel flew a flag on steamer days, and it was a condition of
the hotel 's licence that a light be shown in its window at
night around the time that ships were due.   David Holmes
remembers the crowds and the excitement:
      Everyone rode a horse and it was a common
sight on steamer days to see scores of these animals saddled
and hitched to a long rail on the foreshore while their owners
were busy in the bar, shop or post office, or merely sitting
around on the sea wall.   There were invariably dozens of
dogs too and it was nothing to see 20 or 30 of them chasing
gulls off the beach, creating a terrible din in the process
...
  These steamer days and other gala occasions placed a
strain on the catering facilities at the hotels, 50 or 60
diners sometimes lining up for a meal.   Many required tea
and breakfast as well.   Those coming from great distances
would stay overnight.   The tariff in the 1920s was two
shillings per meal and the same for a bed.
  Whisky was 12/6 per bottle and beer 1/6 to 1/9.
  The bulk of the beer came in 18 and 27 gallon casks.
  The hotel cooking was done on a double oven burning wood
...   It was kept in milk and butter by the proprietor
milking three or four cows.   Fowls too were kept there, and
meat and potatoes procured from nearby farmers.   The menu
was usually meat and potatoes three times a day, with bread
and tea.
  Right up until 1948 the Chathams was a 'proclaimed'
area, which meant that no Maori [or Moriori], half-caste to
full-blood, was allowed liquor for consumption off hotel
premises, nor was anyone else allowed to buy it for them.
  The penalty for breaking this law was severe.   But
Chatham Islanders were drinkers and they found ways to get
around the rule, especially for weddings and
tangis.        
    One who got around it was Tommy Solomon.   Shortly after
the First World War, Constable G. H. Fry of Waitangi heard
that Solomon was giving away whisky and wine, and he went to
Manukau to investigate.   The rumours were true.   Solomon
had ordered a five-gallon keg of whisky and 12 bottles of port
from Forbes and Company, of Lyttelton.   He had invited his
friends around to share this cache and given away most of the
port.  
    When Constable Fry arrived at Manukau, Tommy offered
him a bottle of port and - when this was refused with horror -
told him that the order had been delivered in error.   Tommy
had wanted five gallons of vinegar and a case of tomato sauce,
he said.   The order had been misunderstood and the whisky
and port was the result.  
      Fry did not believe a word of the story but
undertook to check it out before he prosecuted.   While the
constable was laboriously writing to his colleagues in
Lyttelton, Solomon
    telegramed    telegrammed     Forbes and
Company, at sixpence per word, and asked them to support his
story.   The telegram arrived well ahead of the police and
the company obliged.   Consequently, Constable Fry was
unable to press charges.   Solomon claimed subsequently that
the cost of the telegram had far exceeded that of the likely
fine.  
    The opportunity to send telegrams to New Zealand
was one of a host of facilities that became available in
Waitangi in the twentieth century and
  photo   
  captions    photos  
  captions  
began to modernize island life.   The first telephone link
between Waitangi and Owenga commenced in 1913.   The Radio
Station, which sent and received telegraph messages in morse,
opened the same year.   The Chatham Islands County Council,
with its associated offices and procedures, began functioning
in 1925 (though the islands still came under the ultimate
authority of the New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs).
  The two-roomed cottage hospital, staffed by a permanent
doctor and nurse appointed by the Canterbury Hospital Board,
opened in 1927.   A Catholic church, St Theresa 's, was built
in 1929.  
    The most important innovations came about as a result
of the construction between 1931 and 1934 of a major and fully
serviced wharf.   This allowed ships to tie alongside, and
raised the rate of cargo handling and the size and quantity of
goods that could be sent from ship to shore.   Its
coincidence with the existence of the new county council led
to elementary road construction and the appearance of the
first cars and trucks on the island.   This in turn led to a
centralizing of all the island 's shipping activities on
Waitangi.   Finally, when island landowners proved unwilling
or unable to pay rates on land, an additional rating system
was imposed on goods that crossed the wharf, thus saving the
county council from bankruptcy.  
    Technological improvements continued.   A
radio-telephone link with New Zealand was established in 1953,
and an island-wide internal telephone system in 1962.   The
locally owned cooperative meatworks opened at Sandstone in the
hills behind Waitangi in 1968.   Shortly afterwards the
helicopters arrived to move the crayfish.  
    The crayfish boom from the late-1960s until the early
1970s turned out to be the most disruptive, frenetic, and
dangerous period in Chatham Islands history.   It was
lucrative too, but ultimately not for the islanders.   In
this respect, it was a repeat of the experience of the sealing
and whaling eras.  
    The boom began with the accidental discovery by a
mainland boat that the inshore rocks around the Chathams were
infested with crayfish.   It took the unloading of only one
or two hauls for the word to spread and the rush was on.
  Statistics tell part of the story: in 1964 there were no
crayfish exported from the Chathams&semi; in 1965 one boat landed
two tonnes&semi; in 1966 36 boats landed 1271 tonnes&semi; in 1968 120
boats landed 5958 tonnes.   At the height of the rush, there
were 147 vessels chasing crayfish in Chathams waters.   But
by 1969 the tonnage landed had begun to fall.  
    These catches resulted in the opening of eight new
factories on the island (which supplemented the one already
operating at Owenga).   At the peak, some boats had as much
as half-a-million dollars worth of crays on board at one time.
  Seven helicopters lifted full baskets off the boats and
delivered the precious cargoes to the factories.   On slack
days they transported fencing equipment or ferried visitors
around the islands.   Some cowboys even used them to go
muttonbirding at places that had previously been dangerous or
inaccessible, such as the top of Little Mangere Island, 214
metres sheer above the ocean.  
    A proportion of the resulting prosperity rubbed off on
the Chathams.   The islanders had more work available - and
more lucrative work - than they had ever dreamed of.   But
the vast bulk of profits went to the mainland: to the boat
owners, the factory owners, the exporters.   Worse, it was
the islanders who had to cope with the social cost of the
invasion.   Waitangi became the largest fishing port in New
Zealand and its male population trebled in two years.
  Alcoholic consumption was up, crime was up, guns were
toted and shots periodically fired.   Doors could no longer
be left unlocked nor daughters or wives sent unescorted to
fishermen 's parties.  
    On the sea itself, 38 boats were lost during the boom
and with them the lives of 22 fishermen.   The rewards were
high for those who took the risk.   So was the cost.  
    By 1976 the helicopters were gone, all but two of the
factories closed and the population level back to only
slightly more than it had been 10 years before.   The
surviving crayfishing fleet had to accept a two-month closed
season, to allow the crustacea an opportunity to breed.
  The resource had survived, but only just.   Its
continued exploitation has relied on good management and on
policing.  
    Waitangi today, administrative and commercial
centre of the Chathams,  photo   
  captions    photo  
is a quiet community, where the doors turn out to be unlocked
again.   But the signs of its history are there still: from
the boats in the bay, to the buildings on the shore, to the
solid gables of the Hood home, to the ethnically mixed faces
of its residents.   The sight of tall ships, of sealers and
whalers may be gone, as are the tattooed faces of the first
generation of Maori colonists.   But their presence lingers,
along with that of the crayfishermen of the 1960s.   As it
is elsewhere on the Chathams, the past here is always close to
the present.      
  

      Chapter 18  
      PASSENGERS IN PERIL   - WAHINE   AND  
MIKHAIL LERM0NTOV  
    We have become so accustomed to the lure of airline
travel that it is sometimes easy to forget that, even today,
sea transport still moves hundreds of thousands of people
around New Zealand each year.   The Interislander service
links the two islands, Auckland and Wellington 's harbour ferry
services, long neglected, are enjoying a revival, tourist
catamarans and launches are increasing in numbers throughout
the rest of the country and cruise liners are paying New
Zealand more attention each year.  
    Sea travel seems so planned, so safe.   Large
steel-hulled ships, with mind-bogglingly sophisticated
satellite navigation equipment and hourly weather forecasts
over the facsimile should have removed all danger.   Yet, as
the wrecks of the inter-island ferry   Wahine   in 1968
and the Soviet liner   Mikhail Lermontov   in 1986
showed, even the largest and best-maintained ships are immune
neither to the forces of nature nor to rash human actions.  
      'Sleek New   Wahine   is World 's Biggest
Roll-On, Roll-Off Ship,'   proclaimed the headlines in
June 1966 as the Union Company 's latest and largest
Lyttelton-Wellington ferry sailed up Wellington Harbour to
test the new linkspan at the refitted Interisland Wharf.
  For more than 70 years the company 's swift  'steamer
expresses' had criss-crossed the boisterous seas of Cook
Strait virtually without incident and so punctually that some
Wellingtonians boasted they set their watches by the ships.
  Everyone who saw her that day predicted that the
  Wahine   would have an equally long and quiet
career.  
    She certainly looked the part.   At 8944 GRT, she
was one of the world 's largest roll-on, roll-off passenger
ferries.   And she had style!   The sharply raked bow, the
raked masts, the fully enclosed wheelhouse and the prominent
funnel managed to blend the best of the old and the new
aesthetics.   The   Wahine'  s powerful turbo-electric
engines gave her a speedy 21 knots, with several more in
reserve if needed.   The very latest radar and echo-sounders
made her safer than any other ship on the coast.  
    But the   Wahine   was a 'bad luck ship'.
  Her difficulties had started in the shipyard, where labour
disputes had spun out her building time by almost a year.
  Mechanical 'teething
  caption    photo  
problems' and a potentially fatal accident with the gangway at
Lyttelton marred her first year.   Then, in April 1968, came
the disaster that left such an indelible mark on most New
  Zealanders'   memories of the 1960s.  
    It all began in the faraway Coral Sea on 5-6 April
when tropical Cyclone Giselle sprang to life.   In the next
few days, the storm swept down into the Tasman Sea, gathering
intensity.   It passed over the North Island during 9 April,
its winds peaking at more than 100 knots off the Wairarapa
coast.   Wellington, traditionally maligned as one of New
Zealand 's windiest cities, reeled under the impact&semi; rain and
hurricane-force winds battered the city, ripping off roofs,
sinking small craft and testing the city 's emergency
services.  
    These were the appalling conditions into which the
  Wahine   sailed on the morning of 10 April.   The
Union Company 's ferries had punched their way through some
violent storms before and at first the   Wahine'  s
veteran master, Captain Gordon Robertson, was not unusually
concerned.   The meteorologists said that the storm was
abating&semi; with her radar and powerful engines, the
  Wahine   should have been able to get her 610
passengers and 123 crew safely into harbour.  
    But the weather experts got it wrong&semi; the storm swung
south further than predicted.   The   Wahine   was
nosing into harbour early in the morning when, in
deteriorating visibility, her radar 
  photos    caption  
failed at the critical moment, just as she entered the narrow
and rocky entrance to the harbour.   Several strong gusts of
wind then caused her to sheer off course.   Next, a massive
sea struck her on the port side, sending Robertson and his
chief officer flying the length of the wheelhouse.   For 30
minutes they struggled to regain control and head the ship out
to the safety of Cook Strait, but to no avail.   At 6.40 the
  Wahine'  s luck ran out when lookouts called out
  'Rocks ahead!'  , then   'Rocks
astern!'    
     The   Wahine   struck Outer Rock, the
southernmost part of Barrett Reef, tearing open her bottom and
wrecking her engines.   Robertson closed all watertight
doors and dropped anchors but there was now little that anyone
could do to save the helpless ship as she drifted up harbour
completely out of control.   The only ship that could have
done much for her that day was the Union Company 's tug
  Tapuhi   (232 tons, 1945).   Underpowered and rather
long in the tooth, this war-surplus relic attached a towline
to the stricken ferry about 1120 but lost the tow just 20
minutes later.   In danger herself, the   Tapuhi  
wheezed for shelter while crewmen planned a way of towing the
ferry into Worser Bay.   Meanwhile, the   Wahine  
drifted closer to the shore and total destruction.  
    By about noon the   Wahine   had drifted close
to Steeple Rock, off Seatoun, where the last hours of the
drama would be acted out.   For passengers the first real
warning of danger had come at 0610 when the ship graunched her
way across the reef.   Reassured that they were in no
danger, they mustered on B deck 20 minutes later.   For the
rest of the morning they sat around in their lifejackets,
anxious but still hopeful that all would be well.   The ship
had started listing to starboard about 1010 but an
extemporised lunch off Seatoun had offered some temporary
reassurance.    
    An hour later, though, at 1300, the   Wahine  
started to list badly and wallow.   The order to abandon
her, the first given aboard a large New Zealand passenger ship
in over 30 years, came barely 10 minutes later.   Suddenly
shocked and dazed, passengers found themselves climbing
into lifeboats or scrambling over rope ladders down the side
of the ship and into the surging waters.   Leaving a ship,
even one as obviously doomed as the   Wahine,   can be a
terrifying experience, especially if you are elderly, as many
of the ferry 's passengers were.   There was considerable
confusion about which was the starboard side.   The ship 's
list increased dramatically, throwing many off their feet and
making it impossible to launch the port lifeboats.   Some
passengers jumped into the sea, others simply fell.  
    Those who made it into the starboard boats were the
lucky ones.   Even so, with the wind shrieking past and the
rain pelting down, they went through hell before finally
hitting the beach.   Less fortunate were those who ended up
in the frigid water.   Some swam to Seatoun but for most of
those swept towards the rocky, inhospitable coastline on the
eastern side of the harbour, small craft offered the only real
hope of survival.   These eastern shores, beautifully bleak
on even a sunny winter day, are less hospitable than those on
the western side of the harbour.   Virtually unpopulated,
rugged and rocky, they accounted for most of the
  Wahine   casualties, as exhausted swimmers were dashed
against rocks.  
    Rescuers were at hand, although they were greatly
restricted by the sea conditions.   Just before 1400 the New
Zealand Railways ferry   Aramoana   arrived on the
scene.   Although she gave a big psychological boost to
those in the water, her great size kept her at a distance,
launching boats and doing her best to form a breakwater.
  Most of the real rescue work fell to the smaller craft
such as the scow   The Portland,   the RNZNVR launch
  Manga   and private craft.   All had to work hard
because the winds and waves were still strong and the water
chillingly cold.   The first lifeboat was launched at 1330
amid great confusion&semi; by mid-afternoon the first survivors
were coming ashore at Seatoun and volunteers were being
rounded up to bring blankets, clothing, food and tea.
  People from all over the city turned up to help.  
    By the middle of the afternoon, the Wellington Railway
Station, the marshalling station for the frozen, drenched and
battered survivors not injured badly enough to be
hospitalised, resembled a battlefield.   Early newspaper
reports spoke of the possibility of 140 dead or missing&semi; the
final death toll was a still mind-numbing 51.   Most of
those who died were elderly, meeting their end on the rocky
eastern shore where most of the bodies were recovered.  
    New Zealand was stunned.   NZBC camera crews
recorded the shipwreck in a way never before possible and
tributes flooded in from all over the country.   For years
afterwards the television images of the graceful, doomed ship
sliding over onto her side would be a stock shot for the
supposedly swinging   '60s  .  
  captions    photos  
    The inevitable court of inquiry was a more civilised
affair than that for the Erebus tragedy a decade later.   It
cleared the senior officers, the Union Company and the
Wellington Harbour Board of all major charges of wrongdoing.
  It found that the main cause of the   Wahine'  s
loss was that the ship, struck by one of the worst storms in
New Zealand history, sheered off course in zero visibility,
went out of control and struck Barrett Reef, sustaining
serious underwater damage.   The immediate cause of capsize
was free surface water on the vehicle deck.  
    The court also stated that loss of life would have
been much greater had the ship been abandoned off the
entrance.   While criticising Robertson for not warning
shore authorities of the damage sustained by his ship, the
court praised his seafaring skills once he found himself in
trouble.   It also said that it could not criticise his
decision to enter harbour&semi; the storm had changed direction and
character, so much so that the assessment given the ship
at 0500 was no longer valid an hour later when she was
entering the harbour.   It also made a number of
recommendations about ship design (although it could not fault
the   Wahine'  s basic design - she was a superbly built
and well-equipped craft) and recommended that the harbour
board provide a fleet of modern salvage tugs - the 'big reds'
that now dominate port activities.  
    It was all over.   Relatives buried their dead, the
harbour board ordered its tugs, shipping companies sharpened
up shipboard safety procedures and the Union Company ordered a
replacement ship.   That vessel, the   Rangatira  ,
was the last to make the Lyttelton-Wellington run.
  Spiralling fuel and crew costs and competition from air
travel soon spelt the end of the service.   Union sold the
  Maori   without replacing her and handed over the
charter of the   Rangatira   to the Government.   By
1976, the magnificent ship was sailing back to Europe to face
an uncertain future.   Ironically, she had outlasted the
  Wahine   by less than a decade.  
    The   Wahine   was not left to rest in peace.
  The Wellington Harbour Board insisted on her removal&semi;
optimistic salvors talked of refloating the ship intact by
pumping her full of polyurethane foam, but later storms
soon broke her up too badly for this to happen.   And those
storms almost broke the salvors, United Salvage Proprietary
Ltd.   Its chartered coaster,   Holmpark   (588 tons,
1953), assisted by the port floating crane, would be a
familiar sight to Wellingtonians for many years as the company
and its successors struggled to carry out the terms of an
increasingly burdensome contract.  
    Today little remains to mark the dramatic events off
Seatoun 23 years ago.   There are a propeller and a plaque
at Seatoun and the Wellington Maritime Museum and Gallery
boasts a large scale model of the ship in her death throes,
complete with life-boats and struggling swimmers.   In 1990
Lambton Harbour Management Ltd erected one of her masts,
gifted to the museum by a prominent entrepreneur, in a place
of honour in the newly refurbished Frank Kitts Park.  
  caption    photo  
    Souvenirs of the most recent passenger ship loss may
also be seen around Wellington, although less conspicuously
displayed.   They are lifeboats from the Soviet liner
  Mikhail Lermontov,   which became New Zealand 's
biggest shipwreck in February 1986 when she foundered in Port
Gore in the Marlborough Sounds after striking rocks.  
    The stylish, white-hulled   Mikhail Lermontov  
was no stranger to New Zealand waters.   The last of the
five   Ivan Franko   class (the others are the   Ivan
Franko, Aleksandr Pushkin, Tara Shevenko   and   Shota
Rustaveli  ) built at Wismar in East Germany between 1963
and 1972, the   Mikhail Lermontov   (which dated from
1972) had made many voyages to New Zealand cruising for the
hard Western currency that her owners coveted.   She was
big.   Some 19,872 GRT and 176 metres long, when built she
could accommodate 750 one-class passengers and a crew of
300.   Twin 21,000 shp (shaft horsepower) Sulzer diesels
pushed her along at 20 knots.   Just four years before her
final voyage, Hapag-Lloyd 's Bremerhaven shipyard had rebuilt
her accommodation areas to take 550 passengers in greater
comfort and had transformed her into the Soviet Union 's
prestige liner.   In her new guise she measured 20,352
tons.  
    In February 1986 she was in the middle of a four and a
half month cruising season for travel firm CTC Lines of
Sydney.   Nine 11-day cruises were planned, together with a
41-day Asian voyage.   She had visited Auckland and Tauranga
before arriving at Wellington on the morning of 15 February.
  After giving her passengers a day exploring the sights of
the capital, the ship pulled away from the Overseas Passenger
Terminal about midnight, bound for Picton.   There she would
spend the morning and part of the evening before starting the
return journey to Sydney via the scenic highlight of the tour,
Milford Sound.  
    The ship left Picton at 1510.   Marlborough Harbour
Board harbourmaster Captain Don Jamison (who also held a
pilot 's 
  photo    caption  
licence for Milford Sound) was on the bridge, pointing out
places of historic interest as he took the big vessel through
Ship Cove on her run up Queen Charlotte Sound out to the open
sea.   At 1635 the master, Captain Vladislav Vorobyov,
retired to his cabin, leaving instructions to be called back
to the bridge when the   Mikhail Lermontov   reached
Ship Cove.   He was notified at 1700 but he did not
reappear, effectively leaving Jamison in charge.  
    As the ship neared the head of the sound, she was
steering a course of 040&deg;T, which should have
taken her well clear of trouble.   When the passage between
Cape Jackson and its offshore lighthouse opened up, Jamison
ordered the helmsman to   'port
10&deg;'  .   On hearing this, second mate
Sergey Gusev warned chief navigator Sergey Stephanischlev that
Jamison 's course was taking the ship into danger.
  Stephanischlev queried Jamison but was told that the
pilot was merely taking the ship closer to Cape Jackson in
order to give passengers a better look.   When the
clearly worried Stephanischlev again questioned the wisdom of
Jamison 's move at 1734, he was informed that the pilot
intended to take the ship through the passage.
  Stephanischlev neither sent for the master nor overruled
Jamison 's order.  
    By now it was probably too late, anyway.   The
  Mikhail Lermontov   swung from 040&deg;
through north to approximately 300&deg; and headed
through the narrow passage, slightly nearer to the shore than
to the light tower.   At 1737, while steaming at a fairly
fast 15 knots, the   Mikhail Lermontov   grounded on her
starboard side, just forward of amidships.   She kept moving
but rapidly developed a list to starboard as water rushed in.
  Vorobyov returned to the bridge and, instantly realising
the gravity of the situation, turned his ship into Port Gore,
intending to beach her before she sank in open water.  
    He almost made it.   The ship 's designers had
allowed for the flooding of two watertight compartments but
four were already awash and the ship 's generating room was
damaged.   By the time Vorobyov beached in Port Gore an hour
later, his ship had lost almost all power and was down by the
bows.   She drifted onto a sandbank and waited for help to
turn up.   Luck was not with her.   The incoming tide
started to push her off the sandbank (for some reason,
Vorobyov had not dropped the anchor) and out into deeper water
in the bay where she sank at 2050.  
    Ships converged on the scene quickly, the leader being
the LPG tanker   Tarihiko   which had been sheltering
off D'Urville Island.   Other rescuers were the coastal
cement carriers   Golden Bay   and   Milburn
Carrier  , the naval patrol boats HMNZS   Taupo   and
HMNZS   Wakakura   and the rail ferry   Arahura  .
  Also dispatched from Wellington were the tugs
  Kupe   and   Toia   (both of which were turned
back), and the police launch   Lady Elizabeth II.    
    Heavy rain and moderate seas did not make the
night-time rescue an easy one.   Nevertheless, the rescue
flotilla picked up all the passengers and crew, except for a
Soviet engineer 
  photo    caption  
believed to have drowned when the   Lermontov   sank,
and transferred them to the   Arahura   and
  Tarihiko  , which brought them across to Wellington
the following morning.   Considering the remoteness of the
accident, the weather conditions and the age of many of the
passengers, it could have been much worse.   Only 11
passengers suffered minor injuries.   By that evening most
of the mainly Australian tourists were on their way out of
Wellington Airport, bound for home.  
    Then the real trouble started.   The Marine Section
of the Ministry of Transport held a preliminary inquiry under
Captain Steve Ponsford.   It found that Jamison, who was
operating the ship just outside the limits of the Marlborough
Harbour Board pilotage area but who nevertheless knew the area
like the back of his hand, had taken the big ship through a
narrow channel 
  caption    photos    caption  
which he knew to have insufficient draught for her.  
    Why he did so, we will never know.   At that point
Minister of Transport Richard Prebble announced that, since
the cause of the accident had been established (it was really
just stating the obvious), no formal inquiry would be held.
  Despite vociferous criticism from several quarters, not
the least from angry passengers who felt that they ought
to know what had happened and why, as well as from the
Christchurch branch of the Company of Master Mariners who felt
that unanswered questions might blacken the reputation of
New Zealand pilots, Prebble refused to budge.   Nothing
would see the light of day.   A Ministry of Transport
decision to release the full transcript of the preliminary
hearing was then blocked by Jamison, who took legal action to
prevent its publication.  
      The Soviets, more open than Prebble, held their
own inquiry.   This put the blame on Jamison 's decision to
take the ship through a dangerous channel which had
insufficient depth of water to take a vessel of the
  Mikhail Lermontov'  s size.   It censured Captain
Vorobyov (who was transferred to a shore job), Stephanischlev
(who, because he was on the bridge at all times, was sentenced
to four   years'   imprisonment) and Gusev (who had his
certificate suspended for two years).  
    Salvage was considered uneconomic and since the wreck
lies in about 30 metres of water far away from normal shipping
channels, it was left in peace.   Between March and August
1986 teams working from the salvage catamaran   Little
Mermaid   recovered the oil from her tanks (about 1300
tonnes) and secured the wreck site.     