   Longevity and Infirmity: An Inevitable Relationship?  

  V.J. KNOX AND W.L. GEKOSKI 

   The number of elderly people in our society is increasing.  This is, of course, a result of population growth.  The proportion of our population that is elderly is also increasing, both because of declines in the birth rate and because of increased life expectancy.  Demographers do not agree on the exact details of the shifts in the age composition of our population and disagree even more strongly regarding when and if the current trends will abate.  However, no matter which demographic calculations are used it is clear that, at least for the next 50 years, the proportion of elderly individuals in our society will be increasing (Chappell, Strain, and Blandford). 

   These demographic projections have given rise to a variety of dire predictions.  It has been suggested that, as a result of longer life expectancy and dramatic improvement in life-extending technologies, elderly people of the future will experience longer periods of infirmity before death than today's elderly people (Gruenberg; Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  The suggestion that the price we will pay for longer life expectancy is a longer period of infirmity before death strikes dread to most hearts.  The constellation of loss of independence, being a burden on others, and pain or suffering for an extended period seems a high price for a few extra years of life.  Indeed, the greatest fear of elderly people is not death or poverty or loneliness, but incapacity (Harris). 

   Also derived from demographic projections is the suggestion that health care costs will sky-rocket because resources are disproportionately expended for care of chronically ill elderly people (Schulz).  In addition, because both increased health care and pension costs will have to be borne by a proportionately smaller number of workers, the financial burden of the elderly population will contribute to intergenerational conflict over expenditure of available resources (Neugarten; Tindale and Marshall).  Indeed, Callahan (1986) has argued that we will approach the point where the only sensible decision on the societal level will be to terminate expensive health care practices for elderly individuals in favour of directing virtually all health care resources to younger more productive (or potentially productive) individuals.  Debates on the ethics of such a position have already begun (Summerville). 

   An Alternative View: The Compression of Morbidity Hypothesis  

   Some experts take issue with the bleak scenario of longer periods of infirmity occurring as average life expectancy increases and propose a very different view (Fries; Maddox).  Most controversial among these is James Fries, who, in a 1981 book, Vitality and Aging (with Lawrence Crapo), proposed that as more people live to old age they can live less of their old age with a serious infirmity.  This has been labelled the "compression of morbidity" hypothesis.  ("Morbidity" refers to the presence of disease, "infirmity" to the debilitating effects of disease.  In writing about his hypothesis, Fries uses the terms morbidity, infirmity, and disease interchangeably, and in this respect we have followed his lead.) 

   The compression of morbidity hypothesis is stated in terms of two premises: that the maximum human life span is fixed at about 115 years and that with increased use of techniques of prevention and intervention the age at which infirmity first occurs will increase.  Taken together these two premises lead to the conclusion that the duration of infirmity will decrease.  Although the basic idea has been around for some time (Pearl), Fries is currently its most ardent and articulate proponent.  If the compression of morbidity hypothesis is correct, its implications are far-reaching, both to individuals and to society.  In this paper we will elaborate the hypothesis, evaluate criticisms of it, and discuss the implications both of accepting and rejecting it.  Let us consider each of its premises in turn. 

   Maximum Human Life Span is Fixed at 115 Years  

   This premise has two components, one specifying that the maximum life span is fixed and the other specifying the particular age at which it is fixed.  These two components differ both in terms of their contentiousness and in terms of the availability of supporting evidence. 

   Before proceeding, it is helpful to differentiate among average life expectancy (the statistically determined age to which an individual born at a particular time, in a particular place, is likely to live), normal life span (the age to which the average human would live if environmental conditions were optimal), and maximum life span (the maximum age to which an individual human being living under optimal environmental conditions could possibly live).  At the present time, average life expectancy in the developed countries is approaching 80 years for women and is only 5 - 7 years less for men (Myers and Manton).  According to Fries the normal human life span is about 85 years and the maximum human life span is about 115 years. 

   Inherent in the concepts of a normal and a fixed maximum life span is the notion that there is such a thing as a normal process of aging.  Although not taking a strong position regarding the specifics, Fries holds that such a process is probably genetically controlled and determines that as we age: 1) the capacity of each of the body's organs to function declines; 2) because the body is composed of multiple organ systems, each of which is declining, there is an exponentially increasing probability that one of the systems will fail; 3) because the homeostatic processes of the body are very finely tuned and easily disrupted, as organ systems deteriorate, the ability of the body to recover from disruption lessens.  Thus, in old age, as a result of the normal process of aging and in the absence of pathology, the stage is set for death to occur reasonably quickly, as a result of what would have been a minor disruption earlier in life - for example, pneumonia, a minor infection, or a drug interaction effect.  From this perspective the normal process of aging will lead to death if some pathological process does not do so first. 

   Most experts in the area of biological gerontology hold either that the body's cells and/or organs break down from regular use (i.e., in the absence of pathology), or that there are intrinsic genetic factors which regulate, somehow, such breakdowns (Sacher).  Despite much debate on the precise nature of the process controlling normal aging, there is widespread agreement that such a process exists and defines some upper limit on the human life span (Perlmutter and Hall).  This is consistent with the fact that all other species seem to have a fixed maximum life span.  The majority position has not, however, gone unchallenged.  Because the biological changes that occur with increasing age involve decline and deterioration, it is extremely difficult to determine whether particular declines are the result of pathological processes or of intrinsic factors.  Indeed, some argue that there may be no such thing as normal aging, that all changes are the result of pathology (Walford).  It follows from such a position that if the lethal chronic diseases afflicting humans could be eliminated, life could continue indefinitely. 

   Although most biological gerontologists agree that there are normal processes of aging and that a fixed maximum life span must follow, there is substantially less agreement about what this maximum might be (Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  Many do not see the question as particularly urgent or important.  It is, however, a point crucial to Fries's position.  For Fries to argue that compression of morbidity can be achieved in a foreseeable time frame requires that maximum life span be not very far from the currently documented maximum age of about 115 years.  As he notes, although the proportion of individuals living to close to this apparent maximum has steadily increased from 1900 to 1980, there is no evidence to indicate that the maximum itself has shifted during this period.  The fact that average life expectancy has increased but maximum life span has not is reflected in the increasing "rectangularization" of survival curves (the percentage of individuals surviving to a given age in a given year) that has occurred during this century.  This rectangularization can be seen in Figure 1. 

  

   Among the additional arguments Fries cites in favour of the fixed maximum human life span being about 115 years are: that despite many claims to extremely long life, the oldest individual whose age was documented (up to 1981 when the Fries and Crapo book was published) was a Canadian who died at age 113 years, 124 days; that maximum life span for mammalian species may be predicted by brain size / body weight ratio; and that there has been no evidence of change in the maximum human life span over the past 100,000 years.  Let us turn now to examine the second premise of Fries's position. 

   Age at First Infirmity Will Increase  

   A model developed by the scientific advisory group of the World Health Organization (WHO) is useful in conceptualizing the relationship between health and longevity.  This model distinguishes among morbidity-free life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and total life expectancy.  In the typical case there is some period of time between onset of morbidity and onset of disability, and between onset of disability and death.  The length of these two periods varies as a function of age of onset of morbidity and cause of morbidity.  Thus, in the case of relatively rapidly-lethal diseases (e.g., coronary heart disease, stroke, cancer) both the periods of disability-free morbidity and of disability preceding death tend to be relatively short (perhaps only two or three years each), whereas for degenerative diseases (e.g., osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, senile dementia) each period can be much longer (perhaps as long as 15 years).  For different causes of morbidity the length of time in each period will differ somewhat as a function of age of onset of morbidity. 

   The current thinking is that as average life expectancy converges on normal life expectancy for the species more individuals are likely to develop at least one chronic disease (e.g., coronary heart disease, atherosclerosis, respiratory disease, cancer, osteoporosis, senile dementia, diabetes, etc.) that progresses to the point that he or she will experience a long period of increasing incapacity (Schneider and Brody; Simmons-Tropea and Osborn).  Fries argues, however, that it is possible to postpone the onset of the common chronic diseases by a variety of measures, mostly preventive and mostly involving aspects of life-style such as weight control, nutrition, exercise, stress management, elimination of smoking, control of salt intake, moderation in consumption of alcohol, etc.  Timely and appropriate application of such measures would allow most individuals to remain vital into old age and postpone the onset of chronic disease, so that most would die as a result of the normal process of aging before becoming seriously incapacitated by a chronic disease. 

   Argument and Counter-Argument  

   Fries's compression of morbidity hypothesis has attracted an enormous amount of attention and controversy.  There have been countless scholarly and not so scholarly articles criticizing, supporting, or otherwise commenting on his formulation.  Among gerontologists few issues have generated as much controversy in the past 20 or 30 years.  The responses have been varied.  Some have seemed motivated by an intensely personal, emotion-laden desire to believe that the life span is not finite or at least that it is longer than Fries's 115 years.  Such a desire may be fuelled by fears of death, wishes for immortality, or other aspects of individual psychodynamics.  Most responses, however, have been of one of two sorts: criticisms of Fries's interpretation of the data presented to support the compression of morbidity hypothesis, or warnings regarding the implications of accepting the compression of morbidity hypothesis.  We shall deal with these in turn. 

   Criticism of the compression of morbidity hypothesis is directed either to the premise of a fixed maximum life span of about 115 years or to the possibility of delaying the onset of chronic disease.  Given the reasonably compelling evidence across species that the maximum life span is fixed and that in humans it is in the vicinity of 115 years, we find it surprising that most criticism focuses on whether the maximum life span is 115 years, rather than the seemingly more problematic suggestion that prevention programmes can succeed in altering life-styles to the degree necessary to significantly delay the onset of chronic disease. 
 </I

   Chapter 2 
   THE PHYSICAL BASE  

   Arctic and Subarctic Environments  

   Across the northern half of North America, there are two natural regions - the Arctic and the Subarctic.  Climate has played a key role in forming these two biomes.  The arctic climate, for instance, is associated with a particular type of natural vegetation, soils, and biological life.  All these natural features are interrelated.  Their natural vegetation provides the most visible spatial pattern (Figure 2.1).  These same natural regions form the cultural homelands of the Inuit and Indian peoples. 

   The common denominator found in both regions, but particularly in the Arctic, is the presence of a cold environment, which results in slow growth of biological life, natural vegetation, and soil formation.  Because of the polar climate, the presence of permafrost, cold ocean bodies, and the chilling effect of the Labrador current, only the continental areas of the Subarctic experience warm weather for any length of time.  Besides being a cold environment, most of the North receives so little precipitation that it is termed a cold desert.  These two factors, low temperatures and low precipitation, make the North among the least productive biological areas of the world (Figure 2.2).  At the same time, such a slow rate of plant and biological life means that the natural environment is slow to recover from natural or anthropogenic damage.  The fragile nature of the polar environments is indicated by the relationship of temperature and precipitation to plant growth (Figure 2.2). 

   The Arctic has the coldest environment in Canada.  It lies north of the treeline, found primarily in the Northwest Territories but also in Quebec, Newfoundland, Ontario, Yukon, and Manitoba.  It is characterized by a very cold climate where the warmest month has a mean monthly temperature of less than 10C.  Under such climatic conditions, normal tree growth is not possible and a tundra vegetation is formed.  True zonal soils are not found in the Arctic.  In many places, rock and unconsolidated gravels and sands form the ground surface.  Where thin soils have formed in the continuous permafrost zone, they are often classified as cryosols (soils which have an active or thawed layer of less than one metre in depth).  Under these conditions, soil-forming processes work extremely slowly because soil temperatures are often just above the freezing point.  Even when summer air temperatures thaw the top few centimetres of the ground, the presence of permafrost beneath this thin active layer acts not only as a cooling agent but also as a barrier to water. 

   Arctic vegetation is often divided into two zones - Low Arctic and High Arctic.  The Low Arctic occupies the mainland while the High Arctic is found in parts of Keewatin and the Arctic Archipelago.  The Low Arctic zone is characterized by nearly complete plant cover, including many shrubs, sedges, and scrub trees such as birch and willow.  Tussock sedge and low tundra shrubs are the summer grazing of barren ground caribou, which are still a major source of food for Native people.  Heath, herbs, and lichen are the typical plants.  While trees such as willows do grow, they reach a height of only a few centimetres. 

   In the High Arctic zone, freezing temperatures occur almost daily and permafrost is present near the surface throughout the year so that even tundra vegetation growth is inhibited.  Periglacial features - bare rock and a variety of unconsolidated materials - are commonly found.  Such barren arctic lowlands are called polar deserts (Vignette 2.1). 

   Vignette 2.1 Polar Desert  

   The term 'polar desert' usually describes barren areas of bare rock, shattered bedrock, and sterile gravel.  These conditions are essentially an extreme form of fell field, with vegetation cover, at least of higher plants, reduced to near zero.  Actually, this initial impression of barrenness is usually inaccurate.  It is hard to find a square metre of polar desert that has no form of vegetation growing on it.  By far the most important group of plants here are the lichens. 

   Lichens (pronounced like '-unz) are the foot soldiers or unsung heroes of the tundra environment.  Lichens are in a sense a group of primitive plants, although it is more correct to think of them as a colony or association of two kinds of plants living together.  The main body of a lichen is called a thallus; it consists of a dense, tangled mass of threadlike fungal material.  This fungal matrix varies greatly in shape from one kind of lichen to another, but each kind has a characteristic form by which it can usually be identified.  Encapsulated with the fungal strands are quantities of single-celled algae.  These tiny green plants supply the colony with nutrients. 

   SOURCE Young 1989: 198.  

   The treeline often serves as the boundary between the Arctic and the Subarctic.  Ecologically, the treeline represents a major 'break' between the two regions, though in fact the 'break' is a gradual one consisting of a wooded tundra (Vignette 2.2). 

   Vignette 2.2 The Treeline  

   The treeline represents a dividing zone between the Arctic and Subarctic regions.  It closely corresponds to the 10C monthly mean temperature for July.  Other natural factors, such as the depth of the active layer of permafrost, protection from wind, south slope radiation, and well drained land, may result in patches of trees growing north of this isotherm, or conversely, tundra occurring south of it.  Then too, weather varies from year to year, causing the annual position of the isotherm to fluctuate somewhat.  During the relatively warm decade of the 1980s, for instance, summer temperatures were much higher in high latitudes than in most previous decades.  All of these factors have produced a transition zone of wooded tundra between the Arctic and Subarctic regions. 

   Three centres close to this imaginary line are Aklavik (6812'N), Churchill (5848'N), and Cartwright (5336'N).  Aklavik, located on a deltaic island at the mouth of the Mackenzie River, has a warmest-month average mean temperature of 14C; Churchill, situated near the shore of Hudson Bay, has an average July temperature of 11.8C; and Cartwright, lying along the Labrador Coast, has a mean July figure of 12.  About 250 km inland from the coast, temperatures are much higher and, at Happy Valley-Goose Bay, the mean July temperature is 15.8.  The continental effect of this large land mass coupled with the summer cooling caused by the ocean waters of Hudson Bay have resulted in a north-west to south-east trend to the 'treeline'.  

  The proportion of tundra to forest varies but, toward the Arctic zone, only a few stunted trees are found in the more protected areas of river valleys.  Spruce and larch are the predominant species found in the wooded tundra.  This transition zone also represents a biological and cultural boundary.  Many subarctic animals, including the beaver and moose, are not found in the Arctic and of the aboriginal peoples only the Inuit developed the technology permitting year-round life in the Arctic. 

   The Subarctic, the largest natural region in North America, is covered by the boreal forest in a continuous belt from Newfoundland to the Rocky Mountains.  Its summers are short but warm, allowing for a much richer vegetation cover than that found in the Arctic.  Coniferous trees predominate.  Variation in this forest allows for the identification of four subzones: wooded tundra, lichen woodland, closed boreal forest, and forest park-land.  The wooded tundra forms the transition zone beyond which lies the tundra.  Patches of spruce and larch are found in sheltered, low-lying areas while high, more exposed lands are treeless.  The lichen woodland is a savannah-like area consisting of a thick groundcover of lichens interspersed with stands of spruce and pine.  The closed boreal forest, a dense forest of fir, spruce, and pine, is found in southern Yukon, a small part of the Northwest Territories (principally the upper Mackenzie Valley), and the seven provinces.  Within this zone, the forest cover, is broken by a variety of wetlands including muskeg and peat bogs.  In this wet environment, black spruce and larch are the most common species.  On the better drained land, species of spruce, fir, pine, and larch are common along with stands of poplar and birch.  Towards its southern limits, broad-leaf trees, particularly aspen and birch, are found.  The forest parkland, a narrow transition area adjacent to the Canadian Prairies, is a combination of forest and mid-latitude grasslands.  Small bushes, including blueberries, and grasses form the floor cover. 

   Infertile podzolic soils are common in the Subarctic.  These thin, acidic soils are best formed under cool, wet growing conditions where the principal vegetative litter is derived from a coniferous forest.  A low evaporation rate, immature drainage, and permafrost ensure an excess of ground moisture, resulting in severely leached soils and the widespread occurrence of marsh and bogs.  In spite of these environmental handicaps, soil formation is much more active in the Subarctic than it is in the Arctic.  One reason is that the longer summer temperatures allow the ground to thaw to a depth of several metres, promoting biological activity and chemical action.  Another is that the vegetation cover is much denser in the Subarctic than in the Arctic, thus providing much more plant litter for soil formation. 

   Subarctic lakes and forests provide an attractive environment for many animals and wildfowl.  Unlike animals in the Arctic, wildlife in the Subarctic often hibernates during the winter months.  Within this forested biome, a wide variety of animals make their home, including the beaver, moose, and grouse.  The abundance of lakes, marsh, and muskeg provides a favourable habitat for many waterfowl and big game animals such as moose which graze on shoreline vegetation.  In the winter, caribou herds migrate from the Arctic into the northern forest. 

   Polar Climate  

   The cold nature of the North has shaped the vegetation, soils, and biological life found in Arctic and Subarctic.  This cold environment - the polar climate - results primarily from low receipts of solar energy.  It is this limited solar energy entering the northern hemisphere which creates the two types of polar climate: the arctic and the subarctic. 

   Polar climates lie in high latitudes.  They are characterized by low levels of solar energy and precipitation.  On average, the earth's poles receive 40% less radiation than the equator (Lawford 1988: 144).  At the Arctic Circle, solar radiation is reduced to zero for one day and, at higher latitudes, for longer periods of times, reaching six months at the North Pole.  Such low levels of radiation result in continuous cooling of the land and the build-up of masses of frigid arctic air which are associated with daily high temperatures of - 40C or lower.  These frigid arctic air masses often surge southwards, causing blizzard conditions in the Canadian Prairies, subzero temperatures in eastern Canada and freezing temperatures in the southern United States.  In the spring, solar radiation increases but, because of the reflective snow-cover, much of its effect is lost, with up to 80% of the solar radiation being reflected.  Until the snow cover melts, the breaking of winter's grip is slowed.  Once the snow is gone, temperatures recover rapidly and the ensuing warm weather quickly melts the ice from lakes, rivers, and the sea coast.  By early July, sea ice has disappeared from Hudson Bay and, a few weeks later, from along the edge of the arctic sea coast.  Polar Pack Ice, of course, continues to occupy most of the Arctic Ocean.  During the short summer, massive amounts of solar radiation reach the northern lands and waters.  With long daylight hours, the landscape warms and plants quickly appear and flower.  Daily summer temperatures in the Mackenzie Valley and southern Yukon can reach into the low 30C.  By September, however, cooling begins and winter soon regains its grip on the polar lands and waters. 
 
   The seasonal pattern of air temperatures is illustrated in Figure 2.3.  The winter regime is shown by the mean daily temperature for January, demonstrating its cold continental nature.  The coldest January temperatures are found in two places - the north end of Ellesmere and Axel Heiberg islands and just south of Boothia Peninsula.  On the other hand, the mean daily temperature for July demonstrates both the warming effect of the northern land mass and the cooling effect of the Arctic Ocean (both open water and permanent ice pack), Hudson Bay, and the Labrador Current.  There is a marked northwest to southeast trend in the July isotherms with a warm 'corridor' extending down the Mackenzie Valley. 

   Precipitation in the North is generally light with the least amount falling in the Arctic (Figure 2.4).  The main reasons are the inability of cold air to absorb moisture and the existence of ice on northern lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Arctic Ocean for much of the year.  For these reasons, it is not surprising that the lowest annual precipitation occurs in the ice-locked islands situated in the Arctic Archipelago.  Victoria Island, for example, has such scant rain and snowfall (often less than 140 mm annually) that it is described as an 'arctic desert'.  Resolute Bay, which is located just 16 south of the North Pole, receives less than 140 mm per year.  Further south, at the northern edge of the Subarctic, precipitation is heavier.  At Yellowknife, the annual precipitation is around 250 mm.  The Subarctic, on the other hand, generally receives more precipitation, usually over 300 mm annually.  Precipitation does vary, however.  A few areas do receive much greater precipitation.  The greatest amount of precipitation occurs in the Cordillera and along the Atlantic coast.  In these two areas, the high terrain results in orographic precipitation (rain or snow caused when warm, moisture-laden air is forced to rise over hills or mountains and is cooled in the process).  The south coast of Baffin Island receives around 400 mm annually while the figures for the southern coast of Labrador and the mid-North of Quebec exceed 800 mm.  Most precipitation falls as snow.  In the spring, rivers and streams are swollen by melting snow and ice.  Some communities along the Mackenizie River are subject to spring flooding.  Fort Simpson, situated on an island at the confluence of the Liard and Mackenzie Rivers, has been inundated a number of times, and Aklavik, located in the delta of the Mackenzie River, is threatened by spring flood waters almost every year.  The occurrence of spring flooding at Aklavik is so regular that, in the late 1950s, the federal government decided to create the new town of Inuvik rather than expand the community of Aklavik. 

   In addition to the Arctic and Subarctic climatic types, most climatic maps also depict a Cordillera climate, a composite of several climates.  In this text, the mountainous area of northern British Columbia, Yukon, and Northwest Territories is treated as part of the Subarctic.  Elevation and topography have important roles in determining the nature of the Cordillera climate.  Another climatic type found in the North, the Ice Cap climate, is associated with large glaciers, ice caps, and icefields, and has a mean temperature below freezing for all months.  Figure 2.1 shows the distribution of arctic and subarctic climate types.  
 </I

    Biotechnology: Managing the Revolution in Evolution  

  BEPPI CROSARIOL 

   Americans may best remember 1973 for the night their president appeared on television to accept responsibility for the Watergate scandal.  Canadians may recall it as the year world oil prices quadrupled in response to declining production by members of the OPEC cartel.  Still others may recollect it most vividly for the event that precipitated that embargo, the outbreak of war in the Middle East.  In time, though, much of the world may come to remember it best for two relatively uncelebrated men, Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen, and a nameless grey toad.  That year, in a relatively short and characteristically undramatic article in the scientific press, the California researchers described an experiment in which they had stitched together a DNA molecule from parts of two distinct species - a toad and a bacterium - and inserted it into a living bacterial cell.  Though hardly a classic scene of impending revolution, their experiment marked the beginning of a fundamental shift in humanity's relationship to the organic world.  Boyer and Cohen had become the first people to engineer an entirely novel form of life. 

   Though the public could not have been expected to fathom it then - and indeed has yet to appreciate it fully - the pair's cryptic account placed at technology's disposal the basic mechanism of heredity.  Humans had taken control of the molecular code that commands biological growth and regeneration, and with that achievement has come the potential to combat some of the world's most pressing problems.  The products of so-called genetic engineering - hardier and higher yielding crops, more productive livestock, new vaccines, organisms that extract oil and minerals from the earth, and bugs that gobble waste - promise deliverance from hunger, disease, environmental decay, and declining energy resources.  Not to mention relief from a host of more benign aggravations: soon we may produce vegetables that ripen on the vine without going soft, coffee plants with naturally decaffeinated beans, and "super pigs" that yield low-fat pork. 

   Yet along with the hopeful prospects, the Boyer-Cohen experiment also succeeded in bringing to the forefront a litany of profound questions about the risks of applying this new technique to humans and the environment.  While the chemical industry began to dream of crops with greater resistance to herbicides and pesticides, some consumers began to challenge the scant knowledge available about the toxicity of these chemicals.  While other consumers began dreaming of flawless fruits and vegetables, some farmers began to wonder about the ability of uniform crops to withstand genetic diseases.  While other farmers dreamed of microbial treatments to protect seedlings against frost and drought, doctors began to wonder about the accidental spread of experimentally concocted microbes to more vulnerable habitats and about their effects on human health.  While others in the medical community dreamed of curing hereditary deficiencies in humans, social scientists and theologians began to wonder about the propriety of "playing God."  Although these unsettling questions had been suggested by earlier genetic research, it wasn't until 1973 that dealing with them became a critical exercise.  The sudden urgency with which they had come to be asked also confirmed that Boyer and Cohen had, at the very least, given birth not only to a new form of life but to a major technological revolution. 

   Less than two decades later, the revolution known as biotechnology has taken concrete shape around the world.  Researchers at government, university, and private laboratories are now working at a feverish pace to develop new products for industrial and household consumption - a pace that is understandably leaving legislators and regulators far behind.  In biotechnology, Canada stands with a handful of countries at the vanguard of promoting an unprecedented economic and humanitarian opportunity.  Like the development of nuclear power - to which biotechnology is so often compared - however, it is an opportunity in need of careful public-policy attention.  Accordingly, the federal government, chiefly through the National Biotechnology Advisory Committee of the Department of Industry, Science and Technology, has embarked on a process to develop just such a set of regulations.  The nature of those regulations and the government's diligence in enforcing them will determine in large measure whether Canada succeeds in harnessing biotechnology's benefits while avoiding its risks.  The opportunity is unique, and the issues are complex and varied. 

   Biotechnology, broadly speaking, is not new.  Its origins date back eight to ten thousand years, when humans first began selecting plants for food crops.  Most of our main staples can be traced back to those early discoveries.  Gradually our ancestors learned to breed new, more palatable and productive varieties by means of cross-breeding.  Animal domestication also has a long heritage, and the vast diversity we see today in species like the dog is the result of primitive but intentional breeding.  The ubiquity of livestock such as the cow is a reflection of the success and economic relevance of that human intervention. 

   Though they could not be aware of it then, primitive plant and animal breeders were brewing new combinations of the basic units of heredity - genes.  By mating different varieties of the same species, and in rare cases members of different but sexually compatible species, genes became slightly modified and expressed in subsequent generations.  Genetic engineering, the process pioneered by Boyer and Cohen, however, represents a radical departure in speed and effectiveness.  Its essence lies in the direct manipulation of the hereditary blueprint found in living cells, the deoxyribonucleic acid molecule, or DNA, of which genes are constructed. 

   First identified in the 1940s by Oswald Avery and described chemically in 1953 by Nobel Prize-winning researchers James Watson and Francis Crick, DNA has become a synonym for modern biotechnology.  Its celebrated double-helix structure is a wondrous example of chemistry's graceful symmetry.  The DNA molecule consists of two long, spiralling strands of sugar and phosphate which are joined horizontally - as steps join the sides of a winding staircase - by an alternating sequence of chemical structures.  Each horizontal "step" consists of a pair of chemicals called base pairs which jut out from the sugar-phosphate strands and are joined by weak chemical bonds in the middle.  There are four bases - adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine - and each has an affinity for joining with only one of its potential partners: thymine with adenine and cytosine with guanine.  It is in the sequence of these chemicals up and down the DNA strands that genetic information is encoded, like the sequence of binary digits that instructs a computer to perform its calculations.  Depending on the order of the chemicals along distinct portions of the DNA strand, the DNA molecule will instruct the body to synthesize a variety of distinct chains of amino acids known as polypeptides.  A gene is a linear segment of the DNA strand that contains enough information to direct the cell chemistry to compile a polypeptide.  Polypeptides, in turn, are the building blocks of complex molecules known as proteins. 

   Responsible for a wide range of biological functions in plants, animals, and micro-organisms, proteins come in many different kinds and comprise much of the dry weight of living organisms.  They are composed of 20 different amino acids, differing in character according to the number and order of amino acids in the protein chain.  An average protein is composed of about 100 amino acids.  The order of variously shaped amino acids causes a protein to fold into a specific shape, and by virtue of that shape the protein possesses certain properties that determine organic function and structure.  Proteins, for example, can link with oxygen molecules in the air and carry them to required parts of the body, or they can join together and form visible body features such as hair and muscle.  It is proteins, more than anything else, that are the stuff of life. 

   Biotechnology, whether through the direct intervention of genetic engineering or the relative pot luck of conventional breeding, exploits the relationship between genes and the protein structures they are programmed to build.  What permitted Boyer and Cohen to become direct causal agents in the fusion of genetic information from unrelated species was the discovery in 1970 of a specific set of natural chemical tools known as restriction endonucleases that make it possible to splice segments of DNA from different strands.  These enzymes generally exist to restrict DNA from a foreign species from mingling with the genetic material in bacterial cells.  Since the rules of DNA construction in theory permit DNA from any two species - whether bird, insect, fungus, or human - to intertwine, one of the ways nature ensures the survival of living organisms by maintaining diversity is by erecting barriers to this intermingling.  An example of such a barrier is the restriction endonuclease.  When foreign DNA strays into a bacterial cell, these enzymes identify the strand as foreign and defend the bacterial DNA by shattering it to pieces.  Fortunately for the genetic engineer, the attack is very systematic.  Each type of restriction endonuclease is trained to splice a DNA strand at a specific sequence of base pairs to which it has an aversion.  In doing so, it leaves the broken pieces of DNA - there can be millions of them, depending on the length and make-up of the original DNA - with split ends, like the dangling copper ends of a severed extension cord.  These dangling, unmated bases have a tendency to recombine either with their original base-pair partners or with other dangling bases that possess a complementary sequence to their own.  But because of the great numbers of broken pieces of DNA created by the shattering, it is unlikely they will recombine directly with the complementary bases of their original DNA mates.  So they recombine randomly with neighboring DNA segments, producing a host of small and disordered DNA strands. 

   Genetic engineers use the destructive capacity of restriction endonucleases to shatter and combine DNA strands from different species.  In laboratories, DNA strands from two species are mixed with the restriction endonucleases.  Pieces from the two previously distinct DNA strands, having been shattered at similar base-pair-sequence points, have an equal tendency to combine with each other as with pieces from their original DNA strands.  The random recombination yields a mixture of thousands (and perhaps millions) of diverse molecules, many of them consisting of DNA from both species, known as recombinant DNA.  To this mixture, the genetic engineer then adds enzymes known as ligases to cement the bonds. 

   For a piece of recombinant DNA to be useful in industrial applications, many copies are needed.  Since living cells are capable of dividing rapidly - and in so doing make identical copies of their DNA - genetic engineers use them as DNA factories.  To accomplish this they mix a collection of recombinant DNA into a pool of bacterial cells.  There, parts of cells known as plasmids, pieces of DNA which normally move benignly in an out of cells, latch on to stray bits of foreign DNA and shuttle them into cells.  In some cases, viruses, which also have a tendency to latch on to DNA, are used.  When a virus succeeds in invading a cell, it may also carry with it bits of foreign DNA.  In either case, out of the vast and disorganized colony of altered cells in the broth, cells containing the desired DNA segments (which are far too small to be detected microscopically) must be identified.  This can be accomplished using a variety of methods.  In one method, the broth is laced with radioactivated RNA molecules which hone in on the desired DNA strip and mark it.  According to another, the protein produced by a selected cell is isolated and matched against the protein known to be produced by the desired DNA segment.  Once a bacterium possessing the desired DNA segment - or gene - is located, it can be removed from the broth.  These cells can then be cultivated in large quantities to become the drugs, the chemicals, and the microbes of modern biotechnology.  They are what hold the promise and the threat of an industry which, just two decades ago, was relegated almost exclusively to government and university laboratories, and which, propelled by private enterprise, has become a multi-billion-dollar business.  </I

 
   The first sector to capitalize on genetic engineering was health care, particularly in the US.  In 1983, 10 years after Boyer and Cohen performed the first recombinant DNA experiment, scientists cultivated large quantities of the human gene responsible for synthesizing insulin and marketed it as a treatment for diabetics.  Among the most commercially significant products to emerge since the early 1980s, in addition to insulin, are human growth hormone (which combats dwarfism), alpha interferon (an immune-system stimulator which helps ward off disease), tissue plasminogen activator (which can dissolve blood clots in heart-attack patients), a hepatitis-B vaccine, Ortho Pharmaceuticals' OKT-3 (which helps prevent kidney transplant rejection), and a drug called Epogen (which fights anemia).  Annual worldwide sales of just these seven products have reached $1.25 billion US (Gianturco 208).  Worldwide sales of all biotechnology products last year reached $6 billion.  By the turn of the century sales are expected to soar to more than $100 billion (Canadian Biotech 12). 

   That remarkable growth is now being fuelled by rapidly evolving patent legislation.  In perhaps the most sensational event in the brief history of modern biotechnology, the US Patent and Trademark Office in 1987 passed a policy stating that it "considers non-naturally occurring nonhuman multicellular living organisms, including animals, to be patentable subject matter" (Wallis 78).  That declaration prompted fierce opposition from animal-rights activists who feared the policy would promote the exploratory production of misfit animals incapable of fighting pain or disease.  In Canada, after 10 years of controversy, Parliament this summer passed Bill C-15, the plant breeders' rights act.  Though not as sweeping as the US policy, the legislation for the first time puts plant breeders on a par with inventors of machinery and manufacturing processes, permitting them to protect their new plant varieties with 18-year patents.  As a result, plant breeders will not only be able to collect royalties for the seeds they sell but also for the seed adult plants subsequently produce.  Since the bill was introduced in its original form by the liberal government in 1980, some farm groups, led by the National Farmers' Union, have been insisting it will hand over control of the food supply to a handful of large multi-national corporations. 

  Even in the absence of incentive legislation, however, the Canadian biotechnology industry's growth to date has been impressive.  Sales of Canadian biotechnology products reached $660 million in 1988, while the industry as a whole posted a net after-tax loss of only $3 million, a remarkably strong performance for an infant industry that is having to invest considerably in manufacturing facilities and marketing efforts.  During that same year, Canada's biotechnology companies spent a substantial $275 million on research and development.  While many of Canada's biotechnology enterprises are newly created departments of large industrial firms, most are privately owned start-ups employing fewer than 50 people. 

  Building on Canada's historical strength in agricultural, metallurgical, and forestry research, the industry is distinguished by its primary focus on resource-based products and by its diversity.  A recent survey of the industry sponsored by the Department of Industry, Science and Technology and the National Research Council (NRC) reveals that: 

  The products and processes invented and sold by Canadian biotechnology companies involve nearly every industrial sector.  They include cloned varieties of ornamental plants, bioleaching in the mining of uranium and gold, quick tip-of-the-tongue tests to measure blood alcohol, anaerobic digestion systems for the treatment of pulp mill effluents, the world's first conjugate vaccine, cattle improvement through nuclear transplantation and embryo cloning, monoclonal antibodies for blood typing, soil microbes to improve plant growth, diagnostic kits for AIDS, the brewing of beer, biological pesticides, and mass production of biological reagents from eggs and plants. (Canadian Biotech 1)   

  According to that survey, more than 10,000 products are currently under development, 76% of which are being developed by seed companies. 

   The Canadian industry's plans for future growth are equally impressive.  Companies plan to spend almost $7 million each on new manufacturing facilities by 1992.  By the same year, the industry expects to hire 5,000 new employees, nearly doubling its 1989 work-force.  Sales are expected to grow at an average annual rate of 46% between 1988 and 1992, reaching $5 billion.  The expectations seem realistic, too.  About half of the 220 companies involved in biotechnology in Canada reported net profits in 1988.  Overall, the firms are less indebted than those of many established industrial sectors, with an average debt-to-equity ratio in 1988 of 0.47.  The average assets-to-liability ratio for the industry was a relatively healthy 2.3 (Canadian Biotech 6). 

   Such statistics reveal a vibrant and remarkably strong industry.  Yet the overall picture points to more than an increase in efficiency and quantity of research.  It also reflects an impressive shift in demographics.  Private-sector involvement is rapidly growing against public-sector activity.  Where once research proceeded almost exclusively according to public-policy objectives and at the discretion of government funding bodies, private capital is fuelling an expanding proportion of the new growth.  The dynamics of the marketplace will inevitably play an increasingly vital role in the guidance of that growth.  Clearly, the power and priorities of Canadian biotechnology research are changing.  What will some of those early priorities be, and what are the implications for public policy? 

  II 

   The risks associated with the progress of biotechnology can be divided into two categories, those that arise from the research activities themselves and those that arise from the application of its products.  With the Canadian biotechnology industry still in its infancy, and the bulk of its products still in development, the most imminent risks to consider stem from the process, as opposed to the application, of research.  Ominous signs of the level of ignorance among biotechnology researchers of the regulations that apply to their industry are already evident.  In the survey of 84 companies conducted by the federal government and the NRC from November 1988 to February 1989, only 29 respondents were familiar with the Canadian Environmental Protection Act and its implications for industrial biotechnology.  Although ignorance of regulations will not be tolerated as a plea by the courts, that can only be cold comfort when irresponsible practices have a vast potential to alter - or even destroy - parts of the environment.  If biotechnology has the capacity to do irrevocable damage to humans or their surroundings, retroactive enforcement through punishment could be irrelevant.  Measures to ensure compliance will be - and clearly already are - essential.  Regulatory authorities will thus have to work alongside the industrial biotechnology community to assist in making every member aware of the laws and guidelines that apply to their practices. 

   Enforcement presents another challenge.  As in nuclear research, the containment of potentially hazardous material is a genuine problem, albeit only in a very small minority of cases.  While established firms are likely to conform voluntarily with public policies associated with research methods, smaller firms, which prevail in biotechnology, are likely to take more risks.  This situation stands in stark contrast to the nuclear industry where, because of the scale required by the research and its complexity, small companies are effectively precluded from participating.  A sound regulatory policy should contain provisions for random investigation of private laboratories - not unlike the scrutiny to which the food industry is subject - to ensure that proper measures are taken to minimize the accidental release of potentially hazardous organisms. 

   The risks associated with the testing or application of products in the environment, especially micro-organisms, represent perhaps the most critical area for regulation (Doyle 50).  After all, the goal of biotechnology is to alter the environment.  Concerns for the long-term, broad ecological impact of biotechnology will have special relevance to Canadian research and development, where the vast majority of products are emerging from the natural-resource sectors, particularly agriculture.  Monitoring and controlling the effects of that alteration will be the key issues. 

  III 

   When considering ramifications of the products of biotechnology, the vast majority of which have yet to enter the market, an immediate dilemma presents itself.  Is it possible to regulate effectively an enterprise in which potential risks have yet to be uncovered?  The constant pressure to anticipate risks means regulatory agencies must place strong emphasis on the evolution of policy itself.  The explosive growth of the industry underscores the urgency of that need.  Co-operation from private industry would help identify areas of potential public concern, but it is insufficient.  Neutral expertise is critical.  In an era when so many publicly-funded research institutions have seen their direct government support diminish against the growth of even moderately expanding industries, and have seen their historical neutrality compromised by the growing tendency to make federal funding for research contingent upon industrial investment, the capacity of the vibrant private biotechnology industry seems poised to outstrip the resources of those very scientists whose independent expertise will be critical for informing public policy.  Even if funding for public research were to be maintained at a relatively high level of 4%-6% of real growth, it is hardly a match for the 46% annual rate at which the industry plans to expand.  Government and university research efforts in biotechnology cannot be allowed to languish in their present state of underfunding.  Among other things, public and university laboratories will have to step up research into mathematical modelling and controlled-field testing in order to establish a predictive ecology before widespread release takes place. 

   Another systematic trend that may compromise the goal of a sound and publicly supported regulatory system is evident in the the manner in which the newly formed National Biotechnology Advisory Committee operates - namely, under the auspices of the federal Department of Industry, Science and Technology.  A founding priority of this department is to promote the "development, exploitation and applications of strategic technologies to improve Canada's international competitiveness" ("Regulatory Concerns").  Environment Canada, on the other hand, has no such mandate, and its advice ought to take a prime role in the formulation of regulations.  Can the Department of Industry, Science and Technology and the regulatory advisory body it oversees continue to be regarded as neutral sources of scrutiny by the biotechnology industry's present critics, while that department offers direct or indirect subsidies to industry and publicly champions industry's attempts to become globally competitive? 

   Even more important, because more than three-quarters of the products under development in Canada fall into the category of seed research, Canadian regulations will require specific attention to the impact of this research on accidental transmission and genetic diversity.  Plant research, unlike chemical, pharmaceutical, and animalian research, will in many cases require widespread dispersal of experimental genetic material into the environment.  Geographically dispersed material is generally more susceptible to the influences of a host of uncontrollable environmental factors, such as bioleaching into soil and transport by wind, micro-organisms, and animals.  Measures for assessing the potential of accidental transport, as well as the eventual fate of experimental material in the environment, will be crucial. 

   Because agricultural applications of biotechnology can be expected to produce key crops with higher commercial value, it can be expected that biotechnology companies will find willing customers in the Canadian farming industry.  Measures should be taken to ensure that any reduction in genetic diversity through the widespread planting of these key crops will not make the food supply more susceptible to genetic diseases.  This may entail preserving a greater number of existing varieties in seed banks.  The potential for lost diversity also raises an interesting question for the issue of farm support.  Will farmers who attempt to remain competitive by planting only those crops with the highest commercial value be required to bear the burden of sudden losses to their incomes if their crops are wiped out by disease? 

   Insurance against such catastrophes might be obtained in another, potentially more controversial way.  Even if consumers show a strong demand for new "super" varieties, it is possible to promote the desirable goal of genetic diversity by taxing the consumption of these crops.  While the idea of limiting consumer choice through disincentives might seem antithetical to a market-driven economy, it is nevertheless consistent with a society that places high value on environmental security and human health.  Many western societies have already set precedents for market-intervention where public health and safety have been concerned.  Tobacco taxes, despite their threat to some farmers' interests, have enjoyed widespread public support in many countries, including Canada.  Would it be unthinkable, then, to impose taxes on crop varieties that, because of their popularity, limit diversity and thus threaten the food supply?  It has been suggested in the case of tobacco, and not without reasonable justification, that a portion of the proceeds from taxes be diverted to hospitals for the treatment of cancer and heart disease.  Would it be unreasonable to divert the proceeds from taxes on popular crops toward maintaining seed banks? 

   As important as any specific regulatory consideration, finally, is the active participation of the public throughout the advisory process. 
 </I

 

   Wetland vegetation near Old Crow, northern Yukon  
  LYNN OVENDEN 
   Geological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1A 0E8  
  AND 
  GUY R. BRASSARD 
   Department of Biology, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada A1B 3X9  
  Received March 11, 1988 

  OVENDEN, L., and BRASSARD, G. R. 1989. Wetland vegetation near Old Crow, northern Yukon. Can. J. Bot. 67: 954-960. 

   Wetland vegetation on lowlands of northern Yukon was related to gradients of pH, peat depth, and active-layer depth using detrended correspondence analysis.  Seven vegetation types were distinguished by two-way indicator species analysis: Arctophila shoreline marsh, Carex aquatilis - Sphagnum - Chamaedaphne wet meadow, Scorpidium - sedge carpet, Carer rotundata - Andromeda - Sphagnum orientate lawn, Sphagnum - heath on firm peat, thickets and tussock tundra, and Calamagrostis canadensis meadow.  The Arctophila marshes and tussocky shrublands resemble other sites in the subarctic and low arctic wetland regions of North America while Sphagnum - heath on firm peat is typical of high boreal and subarctic wetlands.  The wet meadow, carpet. and lawn types of sedge - moss vegetation cannot be characterized as arctic or boreal because the geographic patterns of sedge - moss wetlands in northwestern North America remain unclear. 

 

   Introduction  

   Vegetation associations and habitat gradients have been determined from a few wetland complexes in the Canadian Arctic (Muc 1977; Vitt and Pakarinen 1977; Sheard and Geale 1983; Miller and Alpert 1984) and from several complexes in the low and mid-boreal (see Kenkel 1987) wetland regions, as mapped by the National Wetlands Working Group (1986).  Comparable studies are rare in the subarctic and high boreal wetland regions, which include the most extensive peat deposits of North America.  Permafrost influences the development and morphology of wetlands (Zoltai and Tarnocai 1975) in these regions, which include the zone of discontinuous permafrost and the southern fringe of the continuous permafrost zone (Brown 1977).  Polygonal peat plateaux, peat plateaux, and patterned fens characterize subarctic wetlands.  Permafrost underlies all wetlands but shoreline fens in the high subarctic, but is absent from patterned fens in the low subarctic (National Wetlands Working Group 1986). 

   A peatland project in northern Yukon Territory provided a chance to describe several sites in a large wetland complex of the high subarctic wetland region.  This paper provides a floristic and structural description of these wetlands and relates them to other reports of wetland vegetation in northwestern North America. 

   Study area  

   Two large old lake basins occur near the village of Old Crow, about 150 km south of the Beaufort Sea (Fig. 1).  Glacial meltwater deposited a thick bed of grey clay during the Late Wisconsinan stadial and finally drained away by 12 000 years BP (Matthews et al. 1987).  Today the basins are poorly drained expanses of patterned peatland and shallow thermokarst lakes.  Shoreline erosion is active in many lakes.  Regional treeline is just north of the Old Crow Flats.  Mean July and January temperatures at Old Crow are 14.2 and -33.1C, respectively, and mean annual temperature is -10.1C.  Mean annual precipitation is 215 mm (Environment Canada 1982).  The mean annual number of thawing degree-days is about 1900 (Burns 1973).  The area lies within the southernmost part of the continuous permafrost zone (Brown 1977). 

   Methods  

   In July of 1979 and 1981, field studies were carried out by the first author.  The second author identified most moss collections, except for Sphagnum specimens, which were identified by D.H. Vitt, University of Alberta.  Voucher specimens of the mosses are deposited at Memorial University and the University of Alberta. 

   At each vegetation site, the percent cover of each species was estimated within an area of 50 - 100 m 2.  In fields of low-centre polygons, separate species lists were compiled for the wet centres and dry ridges of the polygons.  Mosses that could not be identified in the field were characterized and collected: as a check, several handfuls of moss were gathered at random throughout the site and later identified. 

   Three habitat variables at each site were measured: pH (using narrow range dual strip test paper), depth to frost table, and depth of peat (defined as material with loss-on-ignition greater than 80%).  Water pH at each site was tested, either in a polygon trough, between tussocks, in an adjacent pool, or as seepage into a soil pit.  To convert depth to frost table to a less date-dependent estimate of active layer depth, 0.2 cm was added to the measurement for each day before August 1 that it was made.  Since rate of thaw is highly dependent on moisture conditions at a site (Brown 1977: Ryden and Kostov 1980), this estimate of active-layer depth is an index of the relative wetness of each site.  

   Estimates of percent cover were obtained for 65 vascular and 70 moss taxa noted from 74 vegetation sites.  This data set was condensed by removing taxa that occurred in two sites or less, and by grouping species within some genera.  Structure in the resulting data set, of 50 vascular and 39 nonvascular taxa, was explored by ordination (detrended correspondence analysis, DECORANA) and classification (two-way indicator species analysis, TWINSPAN) procedures. 

   Results  

   The first axis of the ordination reflects a strong moisture gradient (Fig. 2), indicated by a high correlation (r= 0.79) of stand score on this axis with active-layer depth.  At all but two of the sites (27, 30) with scores over 100 on the first axis, the water table occurred at or above the vegetation surface. 

   The second axis is significantly correlated with peat depth (r= -0.44, p Sites with a mineral substrate have high scores on this axis and include species that are early colonizers of drained lakebeds on the arctic coast (Ovenden 1986): Arctophila fulva, Calamagrostis canadensis, Arctagrostis latifolia, Equisetum arvense, and Stellaria longipes.  The distribution of ice wedge polygons is also related to peat depth (all sites with  Consequently, most sites that lack distinct ice wedge polygons have high scores on the second axis. 

   Although pH is an imperfect index of dissolved nutrients in fen waters (Sjors 1983), it is closely related to the vegetational gradient poor fen - rich fen (Sjors 1983) and may be linked to trophic status (Pakarinen and Ruuhijarvi 1978).  The pH of the Old Crow sites varies from 4.2-5.8; this gradient is significantly correlated with both the first axis (r= 0.46) and second axis (r= 0.41) of the vegetation ordination.  Sites with low pH and species characteristic of poor fens and oligotrophic mires in Scandinavia (Sjors 1983; Pakarinen and Ruuhijarvi 1978) have low scores on both the first and second axes, while sites with pH 

   In boreal regions, Scorpidium scorpioides, Calliergon trifarium, Campylium stellatum, and Tomenthypnum nitens, are indicators of rich fens (pH  This phenomenon has also been observed on nutrient-deficient peatlands of the Soviet tundra zone (Botch and Masing 1983). 

   TWINSPAN identified seven physiognomic vegetation types (Table 1).  Observations of aquatic vegetation in lakes of the region will be provided first, followed by descriptions of the seven vegetation types. 

   Thermokarst lakes near Old Crow  

   Most of these lakes are 2-3m deep (Matthews et al. 1987) with a pH of 5.0-5.6.  Some support   Nuphar polysepalum (especially in the Bluefish Basin and southern half of the Old Crow Flats) and more rarely, Ceratophyllum demersum (Cwynar 1983).  A large shallow lake in the western Old Crow Flats (XV on Fig. 1) is mostly 65 cm deep with 5-40% cover of Potamogeton richardsonii.  Within 100m of its shore, at the same depth, Potamogeton alpinus subsp. tenuifolius, Potamogeton cf. Berchtoldii, Hippuris vulgaris, Myriophyllum spicatum, and Callitriche hermaphroditica are abundant.  Oospores of Chara or Nitella occur in the surface sediment of some lakes (Ovenden 1985). 

   Group 1: Arctophila fulva marsh  

   Each of the three sites studied is a band of marshy vegetation growing in up to 65 cm of water in silty sediment.  Arctophila fulva and Carex aquatilis are the dominant vascular taxa. Loose, floating mats of Drepanocladus exannulatus, Potentilla palustris, and Myriophyllum spicatum are also important.  Ranunculus trichophyllus, R. gmelinii, Eleocharis acicularis, and Senecio congestus, which occur as seeds in nearshore sediments of the lakes (Ovenden 1985), are probably present, in addition to other taxa listed in Table 1. 

   Group 2:  Carex aquatilis - Chamaedaphne - Sphagnum meadow  

   These sites consist of scattered low shrubs in a moderately dense sward of rhizomatous sedges and cottongrass.  The moss cover is almost continuous and occurs in semisubmersed, floating, and soft cushion forms.  Four species were found at all five sites in this group: Andromedia polifolia, Chamaedaphne calyculata, Carex aquatilis, and Eriophorum russeolum. Drepanocladus and Sphagnum grew at each site, particularly D. lapponicus, D. exannulatus, S. squarrosum, S. rubellum, S. warnstorfii, and S. fuscum.  Betula glandulosa, Potentilla palustris, Oxycoccus, Carex chordorrhiza, and Meesia spp. are also characteristic.  Of the five sites in this group, two occurred in recent meander swales of the Old Crow River, one bordered a small pond, and two formed broad meadows in young thermokarst basins.  The pH was 5.0 at the two last sites.  None displayed obvious ice-wedge polygons or oriented peat ridges. 

   

   Group 3:  Scorpidium - sedge carpet  

   This distinctive assemblage usually contains the following taxa: Scorpidium scorpioides, Drepanocladus revolvens, Calliergon trifarium, Carex limosa, Carex rotundata, Carex chordorrhiza, Eriophorum russeolum, Eriophorum angustifolium, Utricularia intermedia, and Menyanthes trifoliata.  They form a loose mat that floats over flocculent organic mud.  Sphagnum is lacking or sparse except at site 54, where S. jensenii is dominant.  Five sites from group 3 border ponds or lakes and exhibit no peat ridges or evidence of polygons.  The remainder are enclosed by a polygonal or more irregular network of frostcored peat ridges.  Frozen substrate occurred 39 - 58 cm beneath eight of the sites, but none was found (within 80 cm) at the remaining three sites.  The pH ranged from 5.0 - 5.8 except at site 54, where it was 4.4. 

   Group 4: Carex rotundata - Andromeda - Sphagnum orientale lawn  

   All sites in this group are low-centre polygons.  At most, the vegetation is a diffuse lawn of sedges and dwarf shrubs in a floating moss mat, with an active layer of 46 - 56 cm.  Site 9 is firmer.  Common to all six sites are Carex rotundata, Andromeda polifolia, and Sphagnum orientale.  Dwarf birch, Oxycoccus, Eriophorum russeolum, Pedicularis, Trichophorum caespitosum, Sphagnum balticum, and   Drepanocladus   are usually present.  Generally, peat depth exceeded 50 cm. 

   Group 5: Sphagnum - heath on firm peat  

   These sites are the ridges of low-centre polygons or polygonal peat plateaus with level or slightly concave polygons 20 - 30 m in diameter.  Most are acidic (pH = 4.4), with a shallow active layer.  At some sites (39, 40, 49, 56, 60, 66), the peat is over 1.5 m deep and represents 5000 - 11 000 years accumulation (Ovenden 1985).  The younger, shallower peat deposits are indistinctly polygonal or lack ice wedges.  Low shrubs and mosses generally predominate, although most of the ground cover is ericaceous litter and lichens at the drier sites.  The peat forms a firm, even ground surface and sedge tussocks are not important, as they are in group 6.  Several taxa are common in both groups 5 and 6: Ledum decumbens, Vaccinium vitis - idaea, Andromeda, Rubus chamaemorus, Betula glandulosa, Eriophorum vaginatum, Polytrichum, Aulacomnium turgidum, Dicranum angustum, and lichens.   Sites of group 5 are distinguished from those in group 6 by the presence of   Sphagnum lenense, S. fuscum, S. balticum, and abundant Rubus chamaemorus.  Firm peat deposits are sparsely treed (Picea spp.) throughout the Bluefish Basin and along the southern margin of the Old Crow Flats. 

   Group 6: Tall shrub thickets, tussock tundra, and tussock woodlands  

   These are 1.0 - 1.5 m tall thickets of Salix pulchra, Salix glauca, Betula glandulosa, and (or) Alnus crispa, with a ground layer of sedge or cottongrass tussocks and dwarf shrubs.   Vaccinium uliginosum, Pyrola rotundifolia, Arctostaphylos rubra, Carex lugens, Sphagnum fimbriatum, Hylocomium splendens, and Aulacomnium palustre distinguish this group.  The active layer is generally shallow ( 
 </I

 
   Biogeography of island floras in the Great Lakes.  I. Species richness and composition in relation to gull nesting activities  

  E. H. Hogg 

   Boreal Institute for Northern Studies, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta., Canada T6G 2E9  
  AND 
  J. K. Morton and Joan M. Venn 
   Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ont., Canada N2L 3G1  
  Received March 15, 1988 

  HOGG, E. H., MORTON, J. K., and VENN, J. M. 1989.  Biogeography of island floras in the Great Lakes.  I. Species richness and composition in relation to gull nesting activities. Can. J. Bot. 67: 961 - 969.  

   Species - area relations of vascular plants and the effect of nesting colonies of gulls on plant species composition were investigated for 77 islands in Georgian Bay and Lake Huron in the Great Lakes region of Canada.  The percentage of plant species classed as alien, annual, or biennial was significantly greater on islands with gull colonies.  The slope of the species - area curve was significantly steeper on islands supporting gull colonies compared with islands lacking gull colonies.  The expected decline in species richness with increased island remoteness was not detected statistically using multiple regression analysis.  The difference in species - area slopes does not appear to reflect a lower propagule immigration rate to islands with gull colonies, because gulls are important in the dispersal of alien plant species to these islands.  Larger islands with gull colonies tended to have richer floras than islands of similar size without gull colonies.  It is suggested that on these larger islands the presence of gull colonies produces a gradient of soil nutrient and disturbance regimes, thus increasing habitat heterogeneity and species richness. 

 

   Introduction  

   In the nesting colonies of gulls and other seabirds, vegetation is often strongly affected by guano deposition and physical disturbance associated with nesting activity (Gillham 1956; Sobey and Kenworthy 1979: Hogg and Morton 1983).  The tendency, in areas occupied by seabird colonies, is for perennials to be replaced by annuals, and for native species to be replaced by alien weeds (Gillham 1961; Hogg and Morton 1983).  The severe conditions associated with active seabird nesting sites can also result in species-poor plant communities (Gillham 1960, 1962; Weseloh and Brown 1971; McCain 1975; Sobey and Kenworthy 1979; Hogg and Morton 1983).  Small islands are frequently selected as nesting sites by seabirds because of the protection that they offer against mammalian predators (Southern et al. 1985; Timoney et al. 1985).  However, few studies of island biogeography have specifically investigated the impact of nesting seabirds on the composition and species richness of island floras. 

   In Georgian Bay and the Canadian part of Lake Huron, there are numerous small islands, many of which harbour large colonies of nesting Ring-billed and Herring Gulls (Larus delawarensis and Larus argentatus).  The population of nesting gulls in the region was estimated at 172 000 pairs in 1980,which represents a major increase during the previous 20 years (Weseloh et al. 1986).  Human disturbance is minimal on most of the islands, thus providing an excellent opportunity for a phytogeographic study of island floras, some of which are being strongly affected by gull nesting activity.  The objective of this study was to examine the floras of these islands in relation to their size, distance from the nearest mainland, and the presence or absence of nesting gulls. 

   The slope, z, of the power function relationship between species number and island size has received considerable attention in the literature (Gilbert 1980).  In the past, values of z were often used to test predictions arising from the MacArthur and Wilson (1963, 1967) equilibrium theory of island biogeography, but this approach has recently been criticized for several reasons (see Connor and McCoy 1979: Gilbert 1980; Martin 1981; Abbott 1983).  In the present study we determined z for islands with and without gull colonies primarily as a tool to examine the influence of nesting gulls on plant species richness over a wide range of island size.  We also used multiple regression analysis to factor out the effect of area on species diversity (Connor and McCoy 1979) so that the effect of gull colonies and island remoteness on plant species number could be investigated. 

  

   Study area  

   The islands selected for this study are limestone and dolomite islands of Lake Huron, Georgian Bay, and the North Channel (Fig. I).  Most have a low relief, rising only a few metres above present-day lake levels.  During the Nipissing period, which lasted from about 6000 to 4000 years ago, lake levels in the region were about 16 - 23 m higher relative to present-day shorelines (Nichols 1972; Morton and Venn 1984, 1987).  Thus, nearly all of these islands have emerged as dry land since then, and many are probably no more than a few hundred years old.  As a result, their floras have been derived from the neighbouring mainland and islands by dispersal across the intervening expanses of fresh water.  Most of the species show clear adaptations for dispersal by water and birds, while a few appear to have been dispersed by wind or human activity (J.K. Morton and E.H. Hogg, unpublished). 

   Many of the islands have extensive, sparsely vegetated beaches of gravel, cobbles, and slabs pushed up by waves and winter ice.  On several, there are limestone pavements that support a rich herbaceous flora.  These beaches and limestone pavements provide nesting habitat for large colonies of Ring-billed and Herring Gulls that strongly affect the vegetation of their nesting sites (Hogg and Morton 1983).  The larger islands are mainly wooded, usually with a dense scrub forest of Betula papyrifera, Populus tremuloides, Prunus virginiana, Thuja occidentalis, Abies balsamea, and Picea glauca with occasional Sorbus decora, Populus balsamifera, Fraxinus pennsylvanica, and Ulmus americana.  Nomenclature follows Morton and Venn (1987). 

   Methods  

  The analysis is based on the vascular floras of 77 limestone and dolomite islands in Georgian Bay, Lake Huron, and the North Channel in Ontario, Canada.  Floristic data used in the analysis came from the following sources: Morton and Venn (1984) for the islands adjacent Manitoulin Island; Morton and Venn (1987) for the Tobermory Islands off the northern tip of the Bruce Peninsula; J.K. Morton and E.H. Hogg (unpublished) for Barrier Island near Cape Croker on the Bruce Peninsula; and J.K. Morton and J.M. Venn (unpublished) for North and South Limestone Islands in eastern Georgian Bay (Fig. 1).  The area of each island was determined from 1:50 000 scale topographic maps or, for the smaller islands, from nautical charts (1:40 000 or 1:15 000 scale), based on the number of 1-mm grid squares occupied by the island on graph paper overlaying the map or chart.  The distance of each island to the nearest mainland was also determined.  Manitoulin Island, being large (2766 km2) and narrowly separated from the north shore of Georgian Bay and the North Channel, was considered to be "mainland" for the purposes of this study. 

   The islands were divided into the following two groups: (i) islands with a high density of nesting seabirds ("gull islands") and (ii) islands lacking seabird nests or having a low nest density ("non-gull islands").  For most islands, the mean number of nests per hectare was calculated using the 1980 seabird census data provided by the Canadian Wildlife Service (Weseloh et al. 1986).  However, because of variability in seabird colony size from year to year, we supplemented this information with field observations made during the present study and from an earlier seabird census (Ludwig 1962).  Of the 77 islands examined, 27 were designated as gull islands (mean nest density ranged from 35 - 4000 nests/ha) while the remaining 50 were classed as nongull islands (0 - 8 nests/ha).  Ring-billed and Herring Gulls were by far the most abundant seabird species, but there were also nesting populations of Common and Caspian Terns (Sterna hirundo and Sterna caspia) and rookeries of the Great Blue Heron (Ardea herodias) on several of the islands. 

   Each vascular plant species recorded was categorized according to its probable origin (i.e., native or alien) following Morton and Venn (1984, 1987); and its life history characteristic (annual, biennial, or perennial) was categorized according to Fernald (1950), Gleason (1952), and McDonald (1937).  For each island, the number of species in each of the following categories was recorded: alien annual, alien biennial, alien perennial, native annual, native biennial, and native perennial.  The percentage of species in each category was then calculated from the total flora of each island.  The arcsine transformation (Zar 1984) was applied to the percentage data and two-sample t -tests were used to compare the floras of gull and nongull islands.  Because of the influence of human activity on several of the larger islands, this portion of the analysis was restricted to small islands that are 50 ha in size.  The small island category included all 27 of the gull islands and 35 of the nongull islands.  One of the gull islands (White Shingle) was omitted from the comparison because its flora contained only eight species. 

   The relationship between species number and island size was investigated for (i) gull islands, (ii) small nongull islands, and (iii) all nongull islands.  Linear regressions were conducted using several transformations of S (number of species) and A (island area in hectares), which gave equations of the following forms: 

 Equations 1 and 2 are the power function and exponential model, respectively, that have both been commonly used in regression analyses of species - area relationships (Connor and McCoy 1979).  Equations 3 and 4 were used in the attempt to more adequately linearize the relationship between species number and area in the exponential model. 

   The influence of island remoteness, D (distance to mainland measured in kilometres), on species number was also examined by multiple linear regression.  Equations 1 - 4 above, modified by adding the term k 2 x D, were used (k2 is a constant).  

   Results  

   Composition of island floras  

   The combined floras of the 62 small islands with areas of  Of the alien species, 32 (28%) are annuals, 21 (18%) are biennials, while the remaining 62 (54%) are perennials.  Table 1 gives the number of species, area, distance to mainland, and percent composition of the floras (divided into origin and life-history characteristic) for each of these small islands and also for the 15 larger islands. 

   The comparison of floras on the small islands (Table 2) shows that species categorized as either alien or annual are more strongly represented on islands with nesting gull colonies.  Where these two features coincide the difference is most striking: the percentage composition of alien annuals is four times as high on gull islands (8.2%) than on nongull islands (2.0%).  Alien biennials are also strongly favoured on gull islands, but to a lesser extent (ratio = 3.0) than alien annuals.  Alien perennials and native annuals, which each have only one characteristic favoured in gull colonies (i.e., alien or annual) are both favoured on gull islands by a modest and approximately equal amount (ratio = 1.8).  The proportion of native biennials is about the same on gull and nongull islands.  The percentage of native perennials (which lack both of the favoured characteristics for gull islands) was significantly greater on nongull islands (83%) than on gull islands (64%). 

   Linear regressions of species number and island size  

   Linear regressions of species richness in relation to island size are given in Table 3.  For each of the four equations used, the slope of the species - area curve (z) was significantly greater for gull islands (size range of 0.2 - 39 ha) than for small nongull islands with a similar size range (0.4 - 44 ha) (Fig. 2).  When the analysis was expanded to include large nongull islands (up to 4970 ha), the difference in z  between gull and nongull islands remained significant using [1] and [4], but was not significant using [2] and [3].  
 </I

    Late Quaternary volcanic ash in the peatlands of central Alberta  

  S. C. ZOLTAI 

   Canadian Forestry Service, Northern Forestry Centre. 5320-122 St., Edmonton, Alta. Canada T6H 3S5  
  Received February 16, 1988 
  Revision accepted May 17, 1988 

   Three distinct volcanic-ash layers were identified in peat deposits through visual, microscopic, and chemical means.  These layers were related to known volcanic events through the 14C dating of 34 peat samples.  The upper layer was probably Bridge River ash, deposited about 2350 years BP.  The middle layer was possibly St. Helens Y tephra, deposited around 3400 years BP.  The lower ash was related to Mazama tephra, deposited about 6600 years BP.  Ash-enriched layers were formed in the accumulating peat as aerial deposition of tephra occurred, often for several hundred years before and after the presumed main eruption, as shown by  14 C dates and peat accumulation rates.  This implies periodic eruptions by the volcanoes, not all of which produced distinct ash layers in areas distant from the source.  Redeposition from wind-eroded beds of Mazama ash during the dry postglacial climatic maximum is a possibility. 

 

  Can. J. Earth Sci. 26. 207 - 214 (1989) 

   Introduction  

   The widespread occurrence of volcanic ash in western North America is well documented (Powers and Wilcox 1964: Westgate and Dreimanis 1967).  Late Quaternary volcanic-ash beds have been associated with Glacier Peak in Washington, Mount Mazama in Oregon (Powers and Wilcox 1964), Mount St. Helens in Washington, Plinth-Meager Mountain area near Bridge River in British Columbia (Valentine et al. 1987), and Mount Bona in the St. Elias Range in Alaska (Lerbekmo and Campbell 1969). 

   The particle size and abundance of tephra diminish with distance from the source volcano.  Alberta is hundreds of kilometres from the sources; hence only limited amounts of fine-grained tephra can be found.  The distribution of the tephra is often limited to narrow plumes, determined by the prevailing winds at the time of the eruptions.  Close to the source continuous volcanic ash mantles the entire landscape, but in Alberta the ash layers are discontinuous, often concentrated by secondary deposition in areas sheltered from the wind.  Peatlands are particularly suited for the study of volcanic-ash deposition.  The peatland surfaces are wet and well vegetated, trapping the atmospherically deposited tephra.  Furthermore, light amounts of volcanic ashfall do not kill the vegetation and a continuous record of ash enrichment is preserved in the accumulating peat. 

   Peat bogs have long been used by researchers to reveal the presence of one or more volcanic-ash layers (Hansen 1949; Fryxell 1965; Westgate et al. 1969).  Not only are the ash layers well preserved in this quiescent depositional environment (Westgate et al. 1970), but also the peat enveloping the tephra layers provides a ready source of carbon for 14C analyses. 

   In central Alberta, over 500 km from the nearest of the tephra sources, the volcanic-ash layers can be very thin (1-2 mm) and barely visible with the naked eye (Westgate et al. 1969; Lichti-Federovich 1970).  Under the microscope, however, additional volcanic-ash-enriched layers that are otherwise invisible to the unaided eye may become evident.  In this paper the occurrences of both visible and nonvisible volcanic-ash layers are presented and their possible source is discussed on the basis of radiocarbon dates. 

   Methods  

   During 1981, 1984, and 1986 a total of 76 peatlands were cored in Alberta and adjoining Saskatchewan, generally north of the North Saskatchewan River.  A modified Macaulay peat corer with an inside diameter of 34 mm was used and samples were collected at the surface and at 15 cm intervals.  In many peatlands more than one core was taken to determine the physical, chemical, and floristic variability of the peat deposits.  A number of samples were taken with a peat profile cutter (Wardenaar 1987), which extracted 170 cm x 10 cm x 10 cm peat columns.  The peatlands were both fens and bogs (Zoltai et al. 1975), the main difference being that bogs receive only atmospheric water but the fens also receive seepage water. 

   In the laboratory the samples were oven dried and then ashed at 480C.  The ash was treated with hot nitric and hydrochloric acid, and the residue was extracted with hydrochloric acid and filtered.  The filter paper was burned, and the weight of the residual acid-insoluble ash was expressed as a percentage of the dry sample.  The filtrate was analyzed with an inductively coupled argon plasma spectrometer for Ca, Mg, K, Al, S, P, Mn, Fe, Zn, Cu. Ni, Pb, Ti, and Na.  Details on the instrument and sample preparation were reported elsewhere (Ali et al. 1988). 

   The volcanic-glass content was determined under a polarizing microscope.  A small amount of acid-insoluble ash was examined by counting 200 grains of soil particles, including crystalline and tephra grains.  The volcanic-glass content was expressed as a percentage of all counted particles.  The morphology of individual tephra grains and the abundance of various forms were noted.  Selected peat samples were submitted for 14 C dating to Brock University (BGS) and to Alberta Environmental Centre Vegreville (AECV).  

   Results  

   Volcanic-ash layers  

   Volcanic ash was found in 24 of the investigated peatlands.  The ash deposits can be identified visually where they occur as distinct layers, microscopically where the ash is dispersed in a peaty zone, and chemically through the analysis of some elements. 

   Visible volcanic-ash layers occur as distinct white- to buff-coloured layers.  They can be straight and even, or they can be contorted by differential movements in the peat after deposition.  In many cases the ash layers are discontinuous and have variable thickness, possibly reflecting the contour of depositional surfaces.  At an intensively studied site (site 7) the peat-land was cored on a 200 m grid.  A visible ash layer was found between 1.5 and 2 m depth at only 6 of the 21 cored sites.  Attempts to relocate an ash layer for further sampling often failed even when cores were taken only a few centimetres from a core that showed a clearly visible ash layer.  On the other hand, at many sites in the western part of the study area there are two or three parallel volcanic ash layers, separated by up to 10 cm of peat (Fig. 1). 

   Identification of nonvisible volcanic-ash-enriched zones can be accomplished by the examination of the acid-insoluble peat residue under a polarizing microscope.  The individual volcanic-glass shards are usually  Their irregular shape distinguishes them from biogenic silicate materials.  The ash-enriched zones are invariably thicker than the visible ash layers, extending both above and below the visible ash.  Some of these zones are 80 cm thick.  Nonvisible ash zones could be found more consistently at different locations in the same peat-land than visible ash layers.  At the intensively surveyed site 7 all 21 cores had an ash-enriched layer between 1.5 and 2 m. 

   The morphology of individual tephra grains consists of three distinct types.  The most common form is thin polygonal plates with straight edges, often associated with elongated three-sided prisms.  Such prisms often contain inclusions of minerals or gas.  This type is informally identified as bubble-wall material.  The second type is thick, irregular to somewhat elongated grains that have large amounts of gas and mineral inclusions.  This material resembles comminuted pumice.  The third type is elongated cylindrical shapes that have an oval cross section (needles).  Enclosures of gas are often present as bubble trains elongated along the long axis. 

   The treatment of ached peat residue with hydrochloric and nitric acid (aqua regia) removes the readily acid-soluble minerals leaving resistant minerals, such as quartz and field spar, in the residue (Jackson et al. 1986).  Volcanic glass, composed mainly of SiO 2 (silica), is not dissolved in the acid treatment, as shown by the close relationship between amounts of acid-insoluble ash and volcanic ash (Fig. 2). 

   Volcanic ash is composed of elements that are considerably different from the components of the peat.  The bulk of the ash is SiO2 and Al2O3, with significant amounts of FeO, Na20, CaO, and K2O (Westgate et al. 1970).  Among the minor constituents, TiO 2 is noteworthy.  It probably originates from high-TiO 2 magnetites present in the tephra (King et al. 1982).  Most of the major elemental constituents occur commonly in peat, originating from airborne dust and from water-soluble and biologically generated sources.  However, it was found that Ti and Al are associated with high levels of volcanic ash (Si was not determined) (Fig. 2).  Titanium is particularly useful as an indicator because background levels of Ti are low in the study area and the main source is the volcanic aerosol. 

   The advantage of using microscopic and chemical means to identify the nonvisible ash layers is demonstrated in Fig. 2.  In the upper and middle zone the ash grain count and the Ti and Al analyses show distinct peaks, although the acid-insoluble ash is low, possibly because of the small size and low weight of the volcanic-ash grains.  At the base of the lower ash zone all indicators show high values, but the underlying mineral soil is distinguished by the absence of volcanic-ash grains and low Ti values. 

   The examination of peat through radiocarbon dating and through visual, microscopic, and chemical methods resulted in the identification of three distinct volcanic-ash layers and ash-enriched zones.  In cases where radiocarbon control was not available the tephra was assigned to an ash zone on the basis of stratigraphic position and tephra morphology. 

   The depth at which the ash-enriched zones and ash layers occur is not constant because of different rates of peat accumulation in different kinds of wetlands.  The relative position of the ash-enriched zones within the peat deposit is, however, relatively constant, except in anomalous, eroding peat deposits such as site 11.  The base of the upper ash-enriched zone is about a third of the way down the peat column, the middle zone is at about the middle of the peat column, and the lower zone is near the base of the peat column (Table 1). 

   The upper ash-enriched zone was found at 13 locations in peat deposits in the western part of central Alberta (Fig. 3).  It had an average thickness of 3cm (Table 1).  Visible ash was relatively rare in this area (sites 5, 6, and 11; Fig. 3); where present, it was thin and discontinuous (Kearney and Luckman 1983).  The ash consists of about equal proportions of pumice and bubble-wall materials, with rare but constant vesicular needle grains. 

   At 12 sites in the peatlands of central Alberta the middle ash-enriched zone was found in about the same areas as the upper zone (Fig. 4).  The middle zone had an average thickness of 11cm (Table 1).  Visible ash layers were common (sites 2, 7, 8, 9, and 11; Fig. 4).  At site 7 three distinct layers could be discerned (Fig. 1), but the ash generally occurred in a single layer.  The ash consists primarily of pumice, with much lower proportions of bubble-wall material. 

   The lower ash-enriched zone had the widest distribution in the peatlands of central Alberta (Fig. 5).  It contained one or two visible ash layers in the sites west of Edmonton, but visible volcanic ash was not detected in the peat to the north-east.  The ash-enriched zone was thick, averaging 23cm (Table 1).  The ash consists almost exclusively of bubble-wall materials. 

   Radiocarbon dating  

   A total of 33 14C dates are available for samples from 10 peatlands and one lake in central Alberta where the organic deposits were directly relevant to the volcanic-ash layers and ash-enriched zones (Table 2).  These dates provide an approximation of the time of visible ash deposition and the period during which the ash-enriched layer was deposited.  However, most of the dates are some centimetres above or below the ash layer, necessitating a projection of the date on the basis of the rate of peat accumulation.  By assuming a uniform rate of peat formation, one can calculate the rate of peat accumulation between a dated section and the surface (0 years) or between two dated sections.  This rate can then be used to estimate the projected age of any point within the peat section. 
 </I

 
   P - T history and kinematics of the Monashee Decollement near Revelstoke, British Columbia 1   

  LARRY S. LANE 

   Institute of Sedimentary and Petroleum Geology, 3303 - 33rd St. NW, Calgary, Alta., Canada T2L 2A7  

  EDWARD D. GHENT AND MAVIS Z. STOUT 
 Department of Geology and Geophysics, The University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta., Canada T2N 1N4 AND  
  RICHARD L. BROWN 
 Department of Earth Sciences, Carleton University, and Ottawa - Carleton Geoscience Centre, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1S 5B6  

  Received January 5, 1988 

  Revision accepted May 17, 1988 

  Microstructural and petrofabric analyses of mylonites from the Monashee Decollement demonstrate that the hanging wall was displaced eastward over the footwall.  Microstructural kinematic indicators include shear-band foliation, asymmetric strain shadows, and S - C fabrics.  Quartz c axes locally exhibit asymmetric fabrics that are consistent with the microstructural evidence for sense of shear.  The kinematic evidence is reliable because multiple criteria coexist within individual specimens. 

   Metamorphic assemblages from footwall Monashee Complex pelites at the Revelstoke damsite indicate that the peak metamorphic assemblage was sillimanite - K-feldspar - biotite - almandine - quartz +/- plagioclase.  Biotite - garnet geothermometry and garnet - plagioclase - sillimanite - quartz geobarometry set broad constraints on metamorphic temperatures but closer constraints on pressures, near 650C and 630 MPa. 

   Comparison of these data with Late Cretaceous hornblende cooling ages from the same locality indicates that the metamorphism is at least as old as Late Cretaceous.  Complex microstructures relating to repeated mylonitization and annealing render difficult the correlation of metamorphic conditions with mylonitic fabrics.  Early mylonitic textures predate the metamorphic equilibration and thus are pre-Late Cretaceous in age.  Postmetamorphic mylonites are well preserved, but their ages are poorly constrained.  The present interpretation favours a Late Cretaceous to Paleocene age relating to compressional tectonics.  However, an Early Eocene age relating to extensional shearing cannot be excluded. 

 

  Can. J. Earth Sci. 26, 231 - 243 (1989) 

   Introduction  

   The Monashee decollement has been interpreted as a zone of shearing that accommodated large-scale crustal shortening during Mesozoic orogenesis (e.g., Read and Brown 1981; Okulitch 1984; Brown et al. 1986; Brown and Journeay 1987).  The decollement was subsequently reactivated by early Tertiary brittle normal faulting (Lane 1984a) related to regional extension, uplift, and quenching of isotopic systems (e.g., Mathews 1981, 1983; Parrish et al. 1985; Bardoux1985; Carr et al. 1987).  As an example of a Cordilleran metamorphic core complex (Crittenden et al. 1980; Brown and Read 1983), the Monashee Complex has been the subject of ongoing debate on the relative importance of Mesozoic shortening versus Tertiary extension in the geologic evolution of the region. 

   One model concluded that Late Jurassic to Cretaceous westward underthrusting of the deforming Cordilleran orogen by the North American craton created a crustal-scale duplex that uplifted and cooled the Monashee Complex (Brown et al. 1986).  The Monashee Decollement was interpreted as the roof thrust of the duplex, forming primarily as a result of regional shortening of Jurassic to Cretaceous age.  Regional uplift and cooling occurred primarily in the Mesozoic because of crustal duplexing, with later reactivation by modest early Tertiary extension and uplift. 

   An alternative model was based on data from the Valhalla and Okanagan complexes in southern British Columbia (Parrish and Carr 1986; Carr et al. 1987).  It differed in that the role of well-documented Eocene extension was emphasized as the mechanism of uplift and cooling of the metamorphic complex. 

   Tertiary extensional faulting of 10 - 15 km magnitude on the margins of the Monashee Complex near latitude 51 N has been interpreted previously (Read and Brown 1981; Lane 1984a; Brown and Journeay 1987).  Recent models of major Tertiary extension across the Okanagan Complex in southern British Columbia suggest extension by as much as 60 - 100 km, accommodated by ductile shearing at depth and brittle faulting at higher structural levels (Tempelman-Kluit and Parkinson 1986; Parrish and Carr 1986; but see Okulitch 1987).  These models either imply that a similar magnitude of extension occurred on the Monashee Decollement and Columbia River fault zone or require a rapid decrease in extension magnitude northward along strike. 

   The recognition of important Tertiary extension in southern British Columbia results in part from precise dating of synkinematic magmatism, which is widespread in the Okanagan and Valhalla complexes.  The magmatism is spatially, and perhaps genetically, related to major extension (e.g., Mathews 1981; Carr et al. 1987).  Conversely, the timing of displacements along the Monashee Decollement is relatively poorly constrained, correlative with a lack of important synkinematic plutonism.  A different approach is therefore required to answer the questions of when and under what conditions Mesozoic shortening was replaced by Tertiary extension. 

   This paper begins to address those questions by documenting the microstructures, metamorphic-mineral assemblages, and pressure - temperature (P - T) conditions as preserved in metasediments at the Revelstoke damsite.  During construction of the dam across the Columbia River valley, the effects of ductile shearing and brittle faulting on the Monashee Decollement and Columbia River fault zone were temporarily well exposed.  We elaborate on earlier microstructural evidence for top-to-the-east sense of shear on the decollement north of Revelstoke (see Brown and Murphy 1982) by documenting multiple kinematic criteria that are consistent over 50 km of strike length.  The microstructural and metamorphic data are then compared with the local cooling history.  From these data we evaluate the extent to which the relative importance of Mesozoic compression and Tertiary extension can be constrained. 

   Structural setting  

   Development of the orogen began in the Jurassic with the collapse of a marginal basin and obduction of a magmatic arc.  Middle Jurassic west-verging deformation shortened and thickened the continental-margin sedimentary prism, resulting in regional metamorphism.  That was followed by westward underthrusting of the thickened metasedimentary pile by the North American cratonic basement and the formation of a crustal-scale duplex in Late Jurassic through Cretaceous time.  Early Tertiary extension later modified the compressional orogen (see Brown et al. (1986) for a comprehensive treatment). 

  

   The Monashee Complex (Fig. 1) is exposed as a tectonic window through the overlying Selkirk Allochthon (Read and Brown 1981; Brown and Journeay 1987).  Structural geometry in the hanging wall is complex as a result of polyphase deformation (e.g., Brown and Tippett 1978; Raeside and Simony 1983; Brown and Lane 1988).  The structural geometry in the footwall Monashee Complex is also complex (Read and Klepacki 1981; Hoy and Brown 1980; Journeay 1986), but neither structures nor metamorphism can be directly correlated across the Monashee Decollement to the Selkirk Allochthon (Wheeler 1965; Okulitch 1984; Journeay 1986). 

   On the west side of the complex, where the decollement dips shallowly westward, two periods of ductile thrusting (west over east) were interpreted as Late Jurassic and Late Cretaceous to Paleocene in age (Journeay 1986).   Ductile and brittle west-side-down normal faulting of presumed Eocene age reactivated the earlier mylonite zones in an extensional mode (Brown and Journeay 1987).  The transition from contraction to extension is marked on the west margin of the complex by a vergence reversal in the shear zones (Brown and Journeay 1987). 

   Because west and east margins are contiguous around the north end of the complex (Fig. 1), there must have been a contractional history on the east margin.  However, the contractional and extensional parts of the history have never been distinguished because the kinematics are the same for both.  Although brittle extensional faulting on the Columbia River Fault is unequivocally early Tertiary in age (Lane 1984b), the question of how much, if any, of the ductile fabric relates to Tertiary shearing (contractional or extensional) has not yet been addressed. 

   Kinematics  

   Mesoscopic structures  

   Detailed studies at several localities along the mylonite zone indicate a consistent, broadly east-west mylonitic extension lineation and shallow eastward- or northward-dipping mylonitic foliation (Fig. 2).  Foliations axial planar to Middle Jurassic southwest-verging folds in the hanging wall (S2) and variably oriented lineations (L2) parallel to hinge lines are progressively reoriented toward the mylonitic fabrics (S m, L m) in the decollement (Fig. 2).  Variability of the mylonitic foliation reflects syn-mylonite folding (Fig. 3).  Hinges of tight to isoclinal syn-mylonite ductile minor folds at the Revelstoke damsite form two clusters adjacent to the southeast-trending mylonitic extension lineation when plotted on an equal-area stereographic projection (Fig. 3a).  Hinges trending easterly have Z shapes viewed down-plunge and those trending southerly have S shapes, indicating a local southeastward displacement of the hanging wall. 

   Later folds, which probably represent a late increment of the ductile shearing, locally rotated the mylonitic foliation and lineation.  Such folds are well exposed in metasediments at the damsite (Fig. 4).  Axial-surface orientations are highly variable, but hinges plunge shallowly towards the east or northeast (Fig. 3b).  A weak crenulation of micas is locally observed parallel to the fold hinges but at an angle to the mylonitic stretching lineation, particularly near hinge zones.  The late structures refold earlier structures but are usually distinguishable from the earlier folds by their more open form (interlimb angles near 90) and by their round hinge zones (Lane 1984a, Fig. 7).  The folds described here are disrupted and offset by the brittle extensional-fault zone (Lane 1984a). 

   The late-stage folds are relative time markers because they deform mylonitic textures in the quartzite units, unlike the earlier tight to isoclinal minor folds where the quartz-shape fabric is axial planar.  The late folds are continuous across the damsite and involve the entire succession below the principal gouge zone of the Eocene brittle fault (Fig. 4) (Lane 1984a). 

   Microstructures  

   Samples for microstructural and petrofabric analysis were collected from the following localities: (i) Revelstoke damsite and adjacent exposures, (ii) south of La Forme Creek, (iii) south of Carnes Creek and (iv) south of Mars Creek (Fig. 2).  Localities (i) and (ii) include samples from the Monashee Complex and Clachnacudainn Slice and intervening tectonically emplaced lozenges that were possibly derived from the hanging wall.  Localities (iii) and (iv) include samples from the Monashee Complex and tectonic lozenges only, as hanging-wall Goldstream Slice phyllites and interlayered carbonates are not extensively mylonitized. 

   Mylonitic textures are best developed in the Clachnacudainn granitoids and siliceous units in the tectonic lozenges and foot-wall (Fig. 5).  Protomylonitic textures are present near the margins of the zone and in thin quartz-rich layers enclosed by less competent biotite schists.  A foliation parallel to compositional layering is defined by muscovite plates and thin solution seams containing very fine mica.  Their planarity and continuity indicate that they are local planes of relatively high strain (C planes of Berthe et al. 1979) parallel to the mylonitic shear plane (Fig. 6). 

   Biotite in the pelitic schists is recrystallized, so the mesoscopic fabric is not mylonitic (i.e., reduced in grain size in relation to the protolith) but merely anastomoses around plagioclase, garnet, or kyanite porphyroclasts.  Quartz aggregates normally define ribbons elongate in the lineation, but the grains are much coarser than quartz grains in the siliceous layers.  Irregular lobate grain boundaries and equidimensional grain shapes of quartz that locally overgrow mylonitic laminae indicate that thermally activated grain growth postdated major shearing (Fig. 7a).  However, well-developed equant to elongate subgrains and partial to nearly complete dynamic recrystallization of quartz (Figs. 6a, 7b), together with microshears in the biotite matrix (Fig. 7b), indicate a later reactivation.  Shear-band foliations (C' fabrics) are also well developed locally (e.g., Fig. 6d).  Lineations are defined in pelites by elongation of biotite aggregates.  Kyanite and sillimanite are also weakly to strongly aligned and pulled apart parallel to the lineation (Figs. 7b - 7b).  In siliceous layers the extension lineation is usually defined by dismembered porphyroclasts or aggregates of plagioclase and locally tourmaline (Fig. 8a). 
 
   Some quartz grains form ribbons with aspect rations exceeding 160:1 (Lane 1984b) Thin carbonate units are completely mylonitized, with equant grain sizes of 10 m diameter.  In single thin sections where quartz and carbonate layers are both present the grain-size reduction of carbonite is complete, yet quartz layers show protomylonitic textures. 
 
   In sections cut perpendicular to the foliation and parallel to the lineation, the sense of asymmetry of microstructures in a simple-shear-strain environment is an indicator os sense of shear (Ramsay and Graham 1970; Berthe et al. 1979; Davidson et al. 1982; Simpson and Schmid 1983; Passchier and Simpson 1986).  
 

 

   Comparative arboreal behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice, Peromyscus maniculatus   Wagner, from Isle Haute and mainland Nova Scotia  

  M. D. PULSIFER 1  

   Biology Department, Acadia University, Wolfville, N. S. , Canada B0P 1X0  
  Received May 6, 1988 

  PULSIFER, M. D., et HERMAN, T. B. 1989.  Comparative arboreal behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice, Peromyscus maniculatus   Wagner, from Isle Haute and mainland Nova Scotia.  Can. J. Zool. 67: 789 - 794. 

   Locomotor, climbing, and nesting behaviors of wild-caught and captive-born deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus Wagner) from mainland Nova Scotia and from an isolated predator- and competitor-free island were compared in a laboratory observation room.  Locomotor activity did not differ consistently between populations, but wall-seeking was significantly greater in mainland mice.  When exposed to an artificial tree, insular mice made more climbs than mainland mice, but mainland mice climbed for longer periods.  Climbing behavior differed little between males and females in any group.  In a choice experiment, mainland mice selected elevated nest sites significantly more often than ground-level nest sites, while insular mice exhibited no preference. 

 

   Introduction  

   The deer mouse Peromyscus maniculatus occurs throughout North America in a variety of habitats.  The species is morphologically and behaviorally diverse, with some of the most divergent forms occurring on islands.  The behavioral repertoire of Peromyscus is well documented (Eisenberg 1968) and numerous interspecific comparisons exist (Horner 1954; King et al. 1968; Layne 1969; Layne and Ehrhart 1970; Wolff et al. 1983; Wolff 1985; Wolff and Durr 1986), but only a few behavioral studies (Sullivan 1977; Halpin and Sullivan 1978; Halpin 1981) have compared adjacent insular and mainland conspecific populations. 

   In the laboratory, we compared activity and climbing behavior, including nest height preference, in   P. maniculatus from Isle Haute in the Bay of Fundy and from adjacent mainland Nova Scotia.  Several   Peromyscus species, including P. maniculatus, appear morphologically and behaviorally adapted to a semiarboreal existence (Horner 1954; Taylor and McCarley 1963; King et al. 1968; Klein and Layne 1978; Tadlock and Klein 1979; Dewsbury et al. 1980; Newton et al. 1980; Stah 1980; Harney 1983).  These adaptations are usually related to habitat structure (Meserve 1976) or to selective pressures from ground-dwelling predators (Foster 1965) or competitors (M'Closkey 1976; Holbrook 1978, 1979; Newton et al. 1980; Harney 1983).  Since habitats of the mainland and island populations in our study were structurally similar, differences in arboreality or locomotor behavior between the two groups would likely reflect differences in predation or interspecific competition, or random change, between the two locations. 

   In general, behavioral differences between island and mainland populations could reflect genetic differences (selection pressures, origin, or drift) or differences in experience.  To separate the evolutionary and genetic components of these behaviors, we compared the behavior of wild-caught and captive-born mice from the two populations.  We predicted that island mice, relative to mainland mice, would be (i) more active and less evasive of open space, (ii) less arboreal, and (iii) less likely to construct aboveground nests. 

   Materials and methods  

  Deer mice were collected from Isle Haute, an isolated island plateau in the upper Bay of Fundy (4515'N, 6500'W), and on the mainland in Cumberland and Colchester counties, Nova Scotia (4520' - 4550'N, 6350' - 6455'W).  Isle Haute is similar topographically and vegetatively to the mainland study areas (Rowe 1972), but lacks the mainland complement of terrestrial quadrupedal predators and interspecific competitors.  In fact, P. maniculatus is the only terrestrial mammal resident on the island.  Extensive divergence in cranial morphometry between Isle Haute and mainland populations indicates long-term isolation of the island populations (Colquohoun 1983). 

   The laboratory colony of   P. maniculatus   at Acadia University included wild-caught and first-generation captive-born mice from both study areas.  The colony was established in 1980 and until 1984 was supplemented annually with wild-caught mice.  Few litters were conceived in the laboratory.  Rather, females that were pregnant when captured bore their young in captivity. 

   Mice were housed in male-female pairs in 28 x 17 x 13 cm polystyrene cages with stainless steel lids.  Cage floors were covered with wood shavings, and nonabsorbent cotton was supplied for nesting material.  Laboratory chow, sunflower seeds, and water were provided ad libitum.  Cages were kept in a vivarium at 17C with photo-period set at 16L:8D. 

   Two sets of experiments, climbing trials and nest height selection, were conducted within an indoor observation room measuring 2.8 x 1.6 x 2.4 m.   The observation room floor was gridded into 28 (4 x 7) 40-cm squares and was lightly covered with moistened leaves or wood shavings.  Individuals were observed through a 58 x 44 cm window of one-way glass.  The observation area was illuminated by three 40-W incandescent red lights.  During each trial, fresh water and sunflower seeds were provided ad libitum.  After each trial, the observation room and furnishings were cleaned with soap and hot water (70C) before new litter was applied to the floor. 

   In each group (i.e., Isle Haute wild-caught and captive-born, mainland wild-caught and captive-born), adult mice were randomly chosen for both experiments from a pool in which most males were nonscrotal and females were not pregnant or lactating.  In each experiment mice were used only once; however, most mice were used for both experiments. 

   Climbing trials were conducted at least 2 h after "sunset" and not later than 2 h before "sunrise."  An expanding wooden clothes rack was placed in the center of the observation area to serve as a climbing structure (Fig. 1).  This "tree" (64 x 50 x 100 cm, outside dimensions) consisted of a series of horizontal and diagonal rungs that progressed vertically.  Horizontals occurred at levels 25, 47, 73, and 100 cm above the floor.  The tree was sealed with Varathane (R), a waterproof preservative, for ease of cleaning.  Mice were placed singly inside the observation room and were observed for 30 min (three consecutive 10-min periods).  Total ground locomotor activity, i.e., number of squares travelled per unit time (ACT), number of climbing encounters, i.e., all physical contacts with the tree that resulted in a climb (CLIMB), total climbing time (seconds) on tree (TIME), and number of nonclimbing encounters, i.e., olfactory encounters or physical contacts not resulting in a climb (NCLIMB) were recorded on audio tape and later transcribed.  Total number of encounters (ENCT = CLIMB + NCLIMB), climbing time per climbing encounter (T / CLIMB), ratio of climbing encounters to nonclimbing encounters (CLRAT), and thigmotaxis or wall-seeking tendency (WSEEK = ACT / ENCT) were then calculated. 

   For the nest height selection experiment, three equally spaced nest boxes were set on a raised platform (135 x 14 x 2 cm) located in the tree 90 cm above the floor.  Three additional nest boxes were placed on the floor directly below the elevated nest sites, with a seventh box placed away from the tree in the middle of the floor.  The modified tree was placed at one end of the observation room opposite the food and water (Fig. 2). 

   Nest boxes were constructed from 13-mm plywood and measured 10 x 10 x 10 cm inside, with a removable lid and a 2.5-cm entrance-exit hole in a lower right quadrant of one of the sides.   The platform and all nest boxes were sealed with Varathane (R).  Before each trial, all nest boxes contained an equal amount of fresh nonabsorbent cotton for bedding. 

   To reduce the chances of deer mice selecting specific nest boxes because of cues other than nest location, the seven nest boxes for each trial were randomly chosen from a pool of nine and were randomly positioned on the tree. 

   Mice were chosen randomly and placed singly inside the observation room approximately 2 h before "sunrise" and left for 6 - 8 hours.  Each nest box was then examined for disturbance and presence or absence of a nest and (or) mouse.  All materials, including the tree, were thoroughly cleaned before the next trial. 

   Results were analyzed nonparametrically.  Spearman rank order correlations between each behavioral variable and the number of days in captivity were computed to test for the effects of prolonged captivity on behavior.  Friedman two-way analysis of variance (10-min blocks) was used to detect any changes in behavior over the 30-min period.  Nesting preferences were analyzed with single classification goodness of fit tests (Sokal and Rohlf 1969).  All other comparisons within and between groups were made with Mann-Whitney U-tests. 

   Results  
   Climbing trials  

   One hundred and four (with 21 mainland wild-caught, 32 island wild-caught, 32 mainland captive-born, and 19 island captive-born mice) 30-min climbing trials were performed.  Although the median number of captive days for wild-caught mice was significantly greater in island (M= 59.5) than in mainland (M= 24.5) groups (U= 230, p= 0.04), the frequency distributions of time in captivity were similar for both areas (G= 1.56, p Total number of tree encounters (ENCT), total climbing time (TIME), wall-seeking tendency (WSEEK), and climbing time per climbing encounter (T / CLIMB) were not significantly affected by prolonged captivity in mice from either location.  Ground locomotor activity (ACT), ratio of climbing encounters to nonclimbing encounters (CLRAT), and total number of climbing encounters (CLIMB) decreased significantly with extended captivity in the island population.  In mainland wild-caught deer mice, only the number of non-climbing encounters (NCLIMB) decreased significantly over a 270-day period (Table 1).  With the exception of nonclimbing encounters (Table 2), no significant differences between sexes were found within groups. 

   Both wild-caught and captive-born deer mice from Isle Haute encountered and climbed the tree significantly more often than did their mainland counterparts.  However, both mainland groups spent significantly more time on the tree per climbing encounter (Table 2).  Ground locomotor activity did not differ in the two wild-caught groups, but in captive-born groups it was significantly higher in island mice than in mainland mice (Table 2).  As well, mainland groups engaged in wall-seeking behavior significantly more than did island groups (Table 2).  The number of nonclimbing encounters was significantly higher in Isle Haute mice (males and females) than in mainland males, but not females (Table 2).  Total climbing time and the ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters were similar in island and mainland wild-caught groups. 

   In Isle Haute mice, ground locomotor activity and number of nonclimbing tree encounters were significantly greater in captive-born than in wild-caught animals (Table 3).  The number of climbing encounters and the ratio of climbing to non-climbing encounters were significantly greater in wild-caught mice.  However, total climbing time and climbing time per climbing encounter did not differ significantly between these groups.  The tendency to seek the wall was also similar in the two groups (Table 3). 

   In mainland deer mice as well, the number of climbs and ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters were significantly greater in wild-caught than in captive-born animals, but the time per climb was significantly less (Table 3). 

   Although the pattern of change in behaviors during the 30-min trials varied slightly, for most behaviors it was similar in mice from both locations (Table 4).  Birthplace had less effect on the pattern of responses of mainland deer mice during the 30-min trial than on the pattern in island deer mice.  Although wall-seeking tendency remained constant, ground locomotor activity decreased significantly for all groups during the 30-min trial.  Total number of encounters and total non-climbing encounters decreased significantly during the trials in all wild-caught groups.  In captive-born groups total number of encounters decreased in island animals but not in mainland animals; nonclimbing encounters decreased in mainland animals and island females but not island males.  Total climbing encounters and the ratio of climbing to nonclimbing encounters remained constant within all groups except wild-caught island mice, which experienced significant decreases in both of these behaviors.  Total climbing time increased significantly in wild-caught island and captive-born mainland mice.  As well, climbing time per climbing encounter increased in all groups except captive-born island mice (Table 4).  

   Nest height selection   

   One hundred and thirty-nine wild-caught (19 mainland, 34 Isle Haute) and captive-born (56 mainland, 30 Isle Haute) adult deer mice were tested for preference for elevated or ground-level nest sites.  In every trial all nest boxes were explored, as evidenced by soiled or disturbed cotton. 
 </I

 
   Diving patterns of California sea lions, Zalophus californianus    
  STEVEN D. FELDKAMP 1  
  Physiological Research Laboratory A-004, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA 92093, U.S.A.  AND ROBERT L. DELONG AND GEORGE A. ANTONELIS 
  Northwest and Alaska Fisheries Center, National Marine Mammal Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 7600 Sand Pt. Way, N.E., Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  
  Received August 15, 1988 

  FELDKAMP, S. D., DELONG, R.L., and ANTONELIS, G.A. 1989.  Diving patterns of California sea lions, Zalophus californianus. Can. J. Zool. 67: 872 - 883. 

   The diving patterns of 10 adult female California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) were examined during the summer breeding season on San Miguel Island, California, in 1982 and 1983 using time-depth recorders.  During 17 feeding trips, representing 40.6 days at sea, animals made over 8900 dives, the deepest of which was estimated at 274 m, while the longest was 9.9 min.  The majority of dives, however, were less than 3 min in duration and 80 m in depth.  From estimates of body oxygen stores, we predict that dives up to 5.8 min can be supported aerobically.  Therefore, cost-benefit considerations based on prey availability and encounter rate may be more important than physiological limits in shaping the foraging patterns of Zalophus.  Sea lions were active virtually throughout their time at sea, resting on the surface for only 3% of the average trip.  Peak diving frequency occurred during the twilight hours near sunrise and sunset.  Dives were frequent, however, during all hours of the day and were typically clustered into bouts that lasted a mean (+/- SD) of 3.3 +/- 1.5h.  We suggest that these bouts represent active feeding on discrete prey patches.  During short bouts ( During longer bouts, dive depth changed in a manner consistent with pursuit of vertically migrating prey.  During the 1983 El Nino, sea lions compensated for a reduction in food availability by lengthening dive bouts.  These seasonal and diel variations in diving patterns suggest that the rate of prey encounter strongly influences the depth and duration of individual dives. 

 

   Introduction  

   Unlike terrestrial predators, the foraging activities of aquatic mammals take place during breath hold.  Feeding depths and time available for search, pursuit, and prey capture are limited by oxygen stores available upon submergence.  These constraints undoubtedly influence the decision rules used by aquatic predators in locating and pursuing prey.  However, physiological limits to breath hold may not be the most important factor shaping the diving patterns of foraging marine mammals.  Instead, energetic cost-benefit considerations based on prey availability and encounter rates may have a more pronounced effect.  Recent data indicate that many fur seal species rarely approach the calculated limits of dive depth and duration (Gentry et al. 1986a).  Their dives are normally shallow and of short duration.  Consistent, diel variations in dive patterns also suggest that prey availability and location strongly influence the depth and duration of individual dives.  Within absolute physiological limits, there may be considerable flexibility in the ways that marine mammals find and pursue prey. 

   Theoretical treatments of foraging by terrestrial predators have described a number of alternative strategies that animals in different habitats should use to maximize their net rate of energy intake (Schoener 1971; Pyke et al. 1977; Krebs 1978; Orians and Pearson 1979).  For aquatic mammals, however, only Dunstone and O'Connor (1979a, 1979b) have addressed the question of foraging optimization.  They investigated the trade-off between the benefits of continued search and the cost of losing the prey because of oxygen depletion during pursuit by the mink (Mustela vison).  The results of these studies demonstrated that search and pursuit times were negatively correlated, but that oxygen limits accounted for considerably less of the variation in hunting patterns than did optimal foraging considerations based on prey encounter rates. 

   Empirical evidence of the interactions between marine mammals and their prey, which might be used to test predictions of optimal breath-hold foraging, is lacking.  Recent advances in recording instruments, however, now permit the collection of data on the behavior of foraging animals.  As a result, information on several marine mammal and bird species is now available and provides a basis with which to compare their diving and feeding patterns (Kooyman 1981; Kooyman et al. 1982; Nagy et al. 1984; Croxall et al. 1985; Gentry et al. 1986a; Le Boeuf et al. 1988).  Constraints imposed by an animal's physiology, morphology, and habitat and the energetic decision rules common to aquatic predators can be clarified by these comparisons. 

   The California sea lion (Zalophus californianus) is an ideal subject for studies of diving behavior.  Its large size provides an interesting comparison to previous studies of smaller fur seals (Gentry et al. 1986a).  Like other otariid pinnipeds, sea lions make repeated trips to sea during the breeding season, returning each time to suckle their pups.  This enables the deployment and retrieval of dive recorders.  Because they must return with sufficient energy to nourish their pups during their brief onshore fast, there is no doubt that feeding occurs during these offshore periods (Costa 1986). 

   In this study, we examined the diving patterns of female sea lions during these foraging trips.  Although no information was obtained on prey availability, inferences based on optimal foraging predictions were made as to the factors that might influence the observed behavior.  Average dive durations were compared with predicted values to assess the effects of oxygen limitations on feeding patterns.  Comparisons with other species, for which similar data are available, give insights into the foraging constraints imposed by the environment and those that reflect functional limits. 

   Methods  

   This study was conducted at San Miguel Island, California (34N; 12025'W).  Time-depth recorders (TDRs) were deployed on nine lactating, adult California sea lions between mid-July and mid-August 1982, and on five animals during mid-July 1983. 

   The TDR is a 500-g mechanical device that records, in real time, the depth and duration of every dive an animal makes over a 2-week period.  A complete description of this 5 x 20 cm instrument is given by Kooyman et al. (1983) and Gentry and Kooyman (1986).  Dives, along with time marks are recorded on photographic film by a light-emitting diode (LED) mounted on a movable, pressure sensitive bourdon tube.  Only dives greater than 10 m in depth and 30 s in duration can be resolved.  Before deployment and after recovery, all TDRs were calibrated to a maximum depth of 207 m using a portable pressure station. 

   The appearance of the LED trace can also provide an indirect measure of activity (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  Along with dives that appear as pointed traces on the film, the baseline (recorded when the animal is on the surface) may be either broad and wavy, or narrow and flat (Fig. 1).  A broad baseline is caused by movement or chatter of the bourdon tube arm, and we interpret this trace to indicate surface swimming.  Similarly, we interpret a flat baseline as representing inactivity of the animal or its resting on the surface.  From these images a time budget of the animal's activities at sea can be constructed (Fig. 1). 

   Sea lions that were observed nursing a pup were captured with hoop nets and physically immobilized using a large restraint board with a detachable neck brace (Gentry and Holt 1982).  TDRs were fastened to each animal with a harness constructed from straps of 2.5 cm wide tubular nylon webbing (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  A very high frequency (VHF) radio transmitter (5 cm length x 2 cm diameter; Advanced Telemetry Systems) was also attached to the harness to facilitate locating the animal on shore.  When animals returned from sea they were recaptured, the TDR removed, and the animal released. 

   Analysis  

   Upon recovery, the film was developed and enlarged.  Dive traces and timing marks were digitized and printouts obtained of the time each dive occurred, its depth, duration, and length of the following surface interval (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  During analysis, it became clear that dives occurred in clusters, separated by comparatively long surface intervals.  To analyze these dive bouts, we established their ending points in time using a bout-ending criterion (BEC) that was determined by constructing surface interval - survivorship curves (Gentry and Kooyman 1986).  For each animal, the number of post-dive surface intervals with a duration greater than a given time t was plotted logarithmically against t on the ordinate (Fig. 2).  This formed a decreasing function with a slope proportional to the probability of a surface interval of given duration occurring at any time after the last surface interval recorded (Fagen and Young 1978).  A break in the slope, therefore, signifies a change in the probability of surface interval occurrence. 

   For each animal two inflection points were observed: one at 2 to 3 min and the other between 7 and 11 min (Fig. 2).  Following the procedures outlined in Gentry and Kooyman (1986), the second point was chosen to represent the BEC.  To further define a bout, the minimum number of dives was arbitrarily set at 10.  A dive bout, therefore, consisted of 10 or more dives not separated by a surface period exceeding the BEC. 

   Dive bouts were analyzed separately for mean dive depth, duration, and surface interval length.  Interbout intervals were calculated as time from the last dive in a bout until the first dive of the next.  Transit times to and from the feeding grounds were established by calculating the time from shore departure to the first dive bout and that spent in returning to land from the last dive bout. 

   Activity budgets were constructed from records with clear swimming and resting traces.  Time spent swimming was determined as all surface activity excluding resting and time spent on the surface between dives occurring within bouts.  During a dive bout, surface intervals between dives were generally brief and likely did not indicate travel, but instead were associated with replenishing 0 2 stores.  Time spent diving was calculated as the total time that the animal was submerged.  Sea lions were considered resting when the dive trace appeared flat (Fig. 1). 

   To calculate distance travelled from the amount of time spent swimming, estimates were made of both swim speed and the instrument's hydrodynamic impact (Appendix).  These calculations indicate that adult sea lions should travel at an average velocity of 2.5 m/s (9 km/h) when carrying the TDR package.  Empirical data collected on other otariid species of differing body size, however, suggest that this value may be slightly high owing to the assumption of similar relative transport costs between juveniles and adults (P. J. Ponganis, personal communication).  The average velocity of 9 km/h should therefore be viewed as approximate and the calculated foraging ranges regarded as maximum estimates. 

   Results  

   In 1982, all nine animals returned to shore with the instrument package.  One TDR failed, so that eight diving records were obtained (ZC-5 through ZC-12).  In 1983, only two of the five animals returned to the study site (ZC-17 and ZC-20).  A total of 10 dive records was therefore obtained from individual animals.  Because several of the animals made more than one trip to sea prior to recapture, a total of 17 feeding trips was recorded (Table 1).  On 6 of these, film in the TDR ran out while the animal was still at sea.  On 11 of the trips, the return to shore was recorded. 

   Since all animals carried radio tags, it was possible to tell when they returned to San Miguel Island.  However, records clearly showed that two animals (ZC-10 and ZC-17) were on land for periods ranging from 12 to 33 h although they did not return to the study site.  Nevertheless, because offshore rocks and other islands occur near San Miguel, these onshore periods are taken to represent the end of a trip to sea. 

   Performance  

   Over 8900 dives were logged in 40.6 recorded days at sea.  The trace of the deepest dive, although completely recorded on the film, exceeded the calibration of the instrument and was estimated at 274 m (ZC-9; Table 1) by assuming a linear correlation between pressure and the distance travelled by the recording arm.  
 </I
   The Sky's no limit: Astronomy at UVic  

  by Stephen Stamp

   If there is a common thread among the astronomers at UVic, it is the sense that they find the universe so awe-inspiring that they have no choice but to try to learn its secrets and to try to communicate their findings and their sense of awe to others.  Their activities range from lab instructor Russ Robb demonstrating the power of the sun for high school students by burning a pencil with a telescope, to Dr. Chris Pritchet determining the distance of quasars millions of light-years away. 

   The diversity and quality of astronomy research being conducted at UVic is among the reasons that the Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics (HIA) of the National Research Council plans to relocate four of its sections to the university from their present location in Ottawa.  The Institute is still awaiting final approval for the move, but the government of B.C. has committed $22 million for the construction of a new building on campus to house it.  The HIA was established in 1975 and is a significant world-class centre for space sciences and astrophysics.  The HIA cited the work of UVic's astronomers and their links with other institutions such as the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (DAO), which is a section of the HIA, as primary reasons why it wishes to move to UVic.  This move would bring about 100 more professional scientists and support staff to the university and would create an improved environment for UVic's already admirable graduate and undergraduate programs in physics and astronomy. 

   The roots of UVic's astronomy program can be traced to Saskatchewan in the 1920s and '30s .  A young John Climenhaga would lie in a field on his parents' farm and stare upwards, captivated by the beauty and wonder of the sky.  "I've had a long-standing interest in the stars since I was a boy," Climenhaga says, and "Saskatchewan's clear, transparent sky" was perfect for viewing them. 

   Climenhaga believes that "it's human curiosity to want to find out how the universe functions.  You want to understand the physical universe.  If you're a sheep or a cow, you probably don't worry about it. "  For much of his early life, Climenhaga didn't have much time to worry about it, either.  He helped his father run the family farm for several years before enrolling at the University of Saskatchewan at the age of 25, where he earned his B.Sc. in honours math and physics.  He taught at Regina College while completing his master's degree and then took a job at Victoria College in 1949, at age 33.  At the time, he was one of only two physics instructors at the college. 

   In Victoria, his interest in the sky was rekindled when he worked as a summer research assistant at the DAO.  The lure was strong enough that in 1954 Climenhaga took a two-year unpaid leave of absence to earn his Ph.D. in astronomy from the University of Michigan.  Two years after returning to victoria College, he became the first head of the Department of Physics, a post he held for 11 years. 

   During that time, Climenhaga convinced the university administration to add an astronomy component to the physics department.  The first astronomy courses were introduced in 1964, shortly after Victoria College had become UVic.  He continued to instruct students and conduct research full-time until his retirement in 1982.  He was Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science from 1969-72.  Since his retirement, Climenhaga has continued his research and has taught courses in the Department of Physics and Astronomy most years. 

   As impressive as his academic record has been, Climenhaga has earned an equally illustrious reputation as a researcher.  His primary focus has been on the carbon 12 to carbon 13 ratio in carbon stars, which are stars with an enhanced abundance of carbon.  By studying the nuclear reactions in a star and measuring how much carbon 13 is present, one can learn about how heat is produced in the star. 

   Climenhaga has also worked with Dr. Jan Smolinski of the Copernicus Astronomical Centre in Torun, Poland, studying super-giant stars.   To demonstrate how enormous one of these stars is, Climenhaga explains that if the centre of one were at the centre of our sun, the outer edge would be around Mars.  The pair of astronomers has concentrated on interesting features of super-giants' spectra, which sometimes involve two or three gaseous envelopes expanding outwards at different rates. 

   The extent to which Climenhaga is respected by his peers is shown by the honours which he has received.  Upon his retirement in 1982, the dome and astronomy laboratory on top of the Elliott Building were named for him.  In 1985, an asteroid was officially named Minor Planet No. 3034 Climenhaga, in honour of his research, his academic record, and his importance in establishing the astronomy program at UVic. 

   That program has grown to include several world-class astronomers.  Dr. Don VandenBerg is an Associate Professor and is recognized as one of the world's premier theorists in the evolution of stars.  In 1989, he received the E.W.R. Steacie Award, one of the most prestigious awards for science and engineering in Canada.  VandenBerg says that "a star can be modelled by solving a number of fairly straightforward differential equations, though a thorough understanding of nuclear physics and thermodynamics is required." 

   VandenBerg has developed a sophisticated code that creates computer-generated models of stars.  These models allow astronomers to determine with great precision, among other things, the ages of stars, by simulating their evolution.  For example, with VandenBerg's models one can follow the sun from its beginning, when it was just a ball of gases with no nuclear reactions occurring, to its present state.  He can then theorize what will happen in the next five to 10 billion years. 

   To those who may wonder why he wants to look billions of years into the past or future, VandenBerg says that he is "just overwhelmed by the idea that relatively simple equations can describe so much about the universe.  I find it almost unbelievable that one can understand as well as one does something as complicated as the sun."  It is the pure pursuit of knowledge that attracts him to astronomy.  He also likens the aesthetic pleasure of his work to that of a musician's. 

   VandenBerg says that he is "on the fence between theory and observation."  Collaborating extensively with the DAO, he does very little observing himself.  Rather, he engages in critical comparison of observation and theory.  Thanks in large part to VandenBerg's research, theoretical models are now becoming more and more sophisticated and more closely tied to observations.  This correspondence allows astronomers to view estimates of the ages of stars with much more confidence.  In fact, the ages VandenBerg has derived for stars are now used worldwide as the standard ages, and his work has led astronomers to regard his estimate of 14 billion years for the age of the universe as quite reliable. 

   While VandenBerg has been trying to establish the age of the universe, colleague Dr. Chris Pritchet has been busy determining its size.  The final answer has not been found yet, Pritchet says, "but give us two or three years and I think we'll be able to tell you."  

   Pritchet studies galaxies, both very distant and closer, to establish a distance scale of the universe; that is, how far apart objects are from each other.  He says that because the universe is expanding, the distances are increasing.  This leads to the conclusion that the universe was once compressed, until the build-up of heat caused a giant explosion which has become known as the Big Bang.  The force of the explosion has been pushing the edges of the universe outward ever since. 

   Because of the great distances involved in his research, Pritchet says that a characteristic of his work is that he uses very big telescopes.  Rather than creating photographic plates in telescopes to produce images of the objects he views, Pritchet primarily relies on a charge coupled device (commonly called a CCD) which turns images into data on silicon chips.  Those data can then be fed into Pritchet's computer to be reduced, converting them to a format in which they can be used for calculations.  Pritchet says that "for every night observing, I probably spend 10 nights or more reducing data." 

   "Things are happening very quickly in astronomy now," Pritchet says, "because of advances in detector, telescope, and computer technology.  We could hardly do anything if we didn't have complex computers to reduce data."  An example of the advancing technology is a project in which Pritchet is involved which would see Canada, the United States, and Britain work together to build and operate two of the largest telescopes in the world (approximately eight metres in diameter) over the next 10 years.  Pritchet has also worked on the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope in Hawaii and, along with VandenBerg and Dr. David Hartwick, has time booked on the Hubble space telescope.  This telescope was launched by NASA in 1989 and is expected to produce extremely accurate images. 

   NASA is working to overcome current problems which at present make the Hubble useless for many astronomical purposes.  This prospect is exciting, Pritchet says, because a space telescope eliminates the distortion caused by the earth's atmosphere and thus provides much sharper images. 

   Pritchet calls astronomy "intrinsically a very exciting science.  There is some of the same beauty and elegance in modern astronomical science that can be found, though in a completely different form, in such things as productions in the fine arts. " 

   Hartwick, who has been at UVic since 1968, has made breakthroughs in determining the mass of galaxies.  It used to be believed that the mass of the Milky Way was 10 11 times that of the sun, but thanks in large part to Hartwick we now know that it is at least 10 times bigger than that.  He was part of a group of scientists who proved that about 90 percent of the matter in the galaxy is "dark matter," which can't be observed by telescopes.  This discovery has radically altered estimates of the mass of the universe as a whole. 

   Dr. Colin Scarfe came to UVic in 1965 primarily because of its association with the DAO and says that he has probably put in more observing time at the DAO than any other outside observer.  The major emphasis in his work involves determining basic astrophysical quantities of binary stars, including their stellar masses and radial velocities.  Scarfe measures the Doppler shift, which is the shift in a star's spectrum due to its motion.  For over 20 years he has also run a program from Climenhaga Observatory to study period changes in binary stars which eclipse each other.  He uses a photometre attached to the main telescope to time the eclipses and record the times at which the light is faintest. 

   Dr. Ann Gower has been a member of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at UVic since 1973.  She also sees a connection between astronomy and the arts.  "Beginning to achieve an understanding of the universe makes one appreciate it more, just as getting to know about the theory of music lets you appreciate Chopin's music even more." 

   Gower is an expert in radio astronomy.  This involves studying very distant quasars and galaxies which give out an unusually high intensity of radio waves.  She often works with the Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico, making radio images of objects.  Of particular interest is what brought about the existence of the radio galaxies. [This image of the Andromeda galaxy was generated by the Climenhaga Observatory's charge coupled device (CCD), which replaces photographic plates in telescopes and provides images more quickly.  The CCD can pick up asteroids up to 10 times fainter than the old method could.  It was purchased with university funds for the fourth-year astronomy laboratory course.  The department got the device this summer and immediately put it to use to produce this image.  The Andromeda galaxy is approximately 2.2 million light-years away from earth, making it one of the closest galaxies to our own. Photo courtesy of the Climenhaga Observatory.]  Another interesting aspect is the common occurrence in radio galaxies of jets shooting out from either side of the core of a galaxy.  At the core is an object which may be a black hole.  A passing galaxy may disturb material near it and cause it to fall into the hole, releasing tremendous amount of energy which may power the jets.  There are a large number of people in the field, trying to find out how and why the process occurs.  

   "The feeling of studying the distant universe is so awe-inspiring," Gower says.  She also finds that students are very interested in astronomy.  "I love teaching, working with students," Gower says.  An indication of how devoted she is to the task can be seen on the first day of each course she instructs.  She brings her camera to class and photographs each student to help her learn their names.  But carrying out her own research is also very important to Gower, both for its own sake and because it renews her excitement and enthusiasm to return to the classroom and pass on to students how exciting the world of astronomy is.  </I

   THE LIVING PRAIRIE MUSEUM  
   Keeping the tall-grass prairie alive and well in the heart of Winnipeg  
   By George R. Kynman  

   It's the middle of a hot and breezy summer afternoon on the prairie and all around the hum of grass-hoppers, crickets and sparrows drones on.  A small group of school children follows a naturalist on a voyage of exploration through one of the most unusual museums in Canada.  On all sides the concrete dwellings of a modern city are held at bay by a low chain-link fence. 

   It's hard to believe that these 30 acres of tall-grass prairie, with over 100 different types of flowers growing in seeming disorder, can remain undisturbed in the midst of a busy metropolis.  But that's exactly what the Living Prairie Museum attempts to do.  For centuries the prairie has withstood all that Mother Nature could muster - drought, fire, extreme temperatures and grazing - why should the progress and political storms of modern day Winnipeg be any different? 

   The great St. James controversy of 1970, when preservationists were pitted against developers over the future of the 150 acres of prairie in the city's heartland, was one tempest the prairie endured and to which the Museum owes its very existence.  The spirit of the fight lives on, especially in Pete de Wet, an 87-year-old naturalist who angrily swung his cane at politicians during the controversy to such effect that the vote was tipped in favour of preserving the land. 

   In 1968, a Manitoba subcommittee of the International Biological Program recognized that the true or tall-grass prairie was in peril.  Once occupying one and a half million acres in the south-central region of the province, it now covered less than one per cent of its former range.  After great debate, the Museum was created in 1971 as a City of Winnipeg park.  Today, lack of funding and political will is again threatening the park's existence. 

   The Living Prairie Museum protects North America's largest and finest remnant of undisturbed tall-grass prairie.  Visited by 10,000 nature lovers, photographers, students, butterfly enthusiasts and birdwatchers every year, it offers educators the opportunity for study and provides visitors the chance to discover that prairie means more than flatlands and grain fields.  It's a complex ecosystem, shared by a variety of wildflowers, grasses, birds and animals that have adapted to survive their extreme environment. 

   From early spring until late fall, the Museum's small interpretive center functions as the starting point for visitors, who assume that the squat brown building is the main attraction.  But the Living Prairie Museum is not conventional by any standards.  "This is just the reception area," says Cheryl Neilsen, one of the Museum's naturalists. "The real museum is outside." 

   Surrounded by commercial and residential development, it's a tiny oasis of prairie grasses and wildflowers where no flower beds or artificial landscaping exists.  Here, as people wander the narrow grass paths, they are able to experience the uniqueness and diversity of a true prairie in much the same way the early settlers of the region did. 

   Their first impression will be of the native grasses that sweep the area, from the knee-high spear grass (Stipa spartea), to the elevated reaches of the big bluestem (Andropogon gerardi), which stretch shoulder high and beyond. 

   "The premier species of the tall-grass prairie is the big bluestem, which can reach six to eight feet (1.8 - 2.4 m) in more southerly prairies," says Neilson. "But the Museum contains 160 prairie plant species.  Some of them, such as rosinweed (Silphium integrifolium), compass plant (S. laciniatum) and prairie dock (S. terebinthinaceum) were reintroduced to the area during one of the Museum's restoration projects." 

   The tall-grass prairie boasts some of the hardiest members of the plant kingdom.  Their well-developed root systems, some reaching down more than 23 feet (7 m), enabled them to withstand the harsh realities of their environment, including yearly temperatures ranging from - 40C to + 40C, as well as sporadic and torrential rains and an ever-present wind. 

   "This is what makes prairie flowers so hardy and so different from other flowers," says J.H. Ball, a local environmentalist. "Even in very hot or dry periods you can always find three or four different species in bloom.  Usually more." 

   April, known as Crocus Days at the park, marks the beginning of a floral show that will continue until the first snowfall in October.  Most of the Museum's visitors arrive in the final cool weeks of the month to celebrate the coming of spring and the arrival of the prairie crocus (Anemone patens). 

   Unlike its English namesake, this crocus (also known as the Pasque flower and the blue tulip), is not grown from bulb but from seed.  When it's cloudy, it appears as a thumb-sized mauve flower bud pushing up through the snow.  When the sun is out, regardless of below-zero temperatures, it unfolds its six petals to reveal a brilliant yellow center. 

   Hugging the earth, the croci's furry stems and flowers are velvety to the touch, and their soft shiny petals are either pale purple, mauve, a very pale blue or white.  They reflect the sun towards the flower's bright center, which is several degrees warmer than the surrounding air, offering a haven to spring insects. 

   "You can explore the prairie with a guide or follow the self-guiding trail, but you'll probably find more if you just wander around alone," says Ball. "In May you'll see lots of prairie buttercups (Ranunculus rhomboideus), small in size but with a big, bright, buttery yellow colour." 

   June is called Wild Rose month at the Museum because of the abundance of low prairie roses (Rosa arkansana).  The entire landscape becomes a sea of pink, red and white, all swaying to the call of meadowlarks and finches.  Floating through the air is their delicate scent. 

   Often confused with the taller wood's rose (Rosa woodsii), and the prickly rose (Rosa acicularis), the low prairie rose rarely exceeds 12 inches (30 cm) in height.  It is considered an endangered species in Canada and is not easily grown from seed.  The successful gardener, however, will be rewarded with plentiful blooms and a harvest of tasty rose hips for teas, jams and jellies. 

   Not all of the Museum's resident flowers are like the showy roses.  Criss-crossing the site on a given day you are likely to encounter the delicate bird-foot violet (Viola pedatafida) snuggling down to avoid the ever-present wind.  Resembling a bird's foot, this blue violet is far hardier than many suspect and is able to survive fire as well as drought. 

   The large red-orange funnels of prairie lilies (Liliurn philadelphicum) are unmistakable.  Standing with their blooms just above the surrounding plants, they sometimes fall victim to the unscrupulous picker.  The tiny, pale amethyst-coloured trumpets of the lilac bearded tongue (Penstemon gracilis) don't seem to worry about pickers.  They raise their blossoms up high for all to see, but you have to bend over and look carefully to find them. 

   June is also the time of year when the heady smell of the wolfwillow, or silverberry (Elaeagnus commutata) flows across the landscape.  This shrub has yellow flowers that are so tiny they seem incapable of producing such a heavy, sweet fragrance, but you only have to follow your nose for proof of its origin. 

   July and August are very quiet at the Museum.  Temperatures of over 30C typify the prairie day in summer and keep away all but the hardiest of explorers.  But many still come, meandering happily, accompanied by the music of crickets and grasshoppers. 

   "You get a terrific array of colour during the hottest days.  And plants are a lot taller - usually about a meter high by August," says Ball, who walks the trails of the Museum once or twice a month. "You'll find purples and golds mainly.  White and purple prairie clovers (Petalostemon candidum and P. purpureum) dot the site, looking a lot like little cattails." 

   Meadow and dotted blazingstar (Liatris ligulistylis and L. punclata) appear as dirty, plum-coloured paint brushes.  A variety of sunflowers with their sulphur yellows and tarnished golds stretch just above their neighbours to take advantage of the wind and insects for pollination. 

   This is the time of year to find the blue-purple funnels and oblong leaves of the small, elusive and late-blooming gentian (Gentiana affinis), which grows only to a height of ten inches (25 cm).  With the rest of the prairie striving for the meter mark, it pays to ask the naturalist for direction to the newest blooms. 

   The chalky colours of sage (Artemisia ludoviciana), silver leaf psoralea (Psoralea argophylla) and wolfwillow give the prairie a hoary look in July, so much so that one area of the park is called Silver Heights.  By August some of the more somber tones of the late summer flowers stand out against the subtle silvers.  This is when you can find bergamot (Monarda fistulosa), used to make Earl Grey tea, in bloom.  The pink-purple fists of these flowers smell suspiciously of pizza, but the crushed stem will yield the familiar smell of the oil that flavours the tea. 

   While it may appear that there is little active management of the Museum, in the summer months three naturalists (only one is kept on over the winter) and assorted volunteers are regularly at work struggling to maintain the prairie given its location in the middle of the city. 

   People who come to the Museum in June are often shocked to see the staff running about with brooms and rubber flappers, setting fires and guiding their course.  Though it occasionally appears that a disaster is in progress, the opposite is true. 

   "We burn about one-fifth of the prairie every year, much to the annoyance of the surrounding home owners." says Neilsen. "It's an annual event, complete with leaping flames and huge clouds of smoke."  Not a bad day's work for the staff and helpers, but a little daunting for nearby residents, whose complaints and protests make managing the prairie a constant controversy. 

   But the prairie must burn if it's to remain healthy.  Fire is a natural part of prairie life; in fact, the plants have adapted to it and need it.  Burning encourages the growth of native species and inhibits succession by forest species, most notably the trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides).  It also allows seed to break dormancy and contributes to improving the nutrient level in the soil. 

   The entire 30-acre site is weeded by hand.  This back-breaking and tedious work is necessary to control the invading weed species that spring up in the small disturbed areas, where paths cut across the site or ground has been broken either by accident or past agricultural activity. 

   "On occasion they use some of the local law-breakers," says Ball. "They work off their fines by pulling weeds.  But most of the work is done by the staff."  The primary species designated as weeds in the prairie are Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), yellow sweet clover (Melilotus officinalis) and alfalfa (Medicago sativa). 

   A unique Canadian heritage, the Living Prairie Museum is a natural celebration of life and colour.  With nearly 200 native species of plants and fauna living alongside the monarch butterfly, western meadowlark, white-tailed jack rabbit and red fox, this museum provides a welcome contrast to the houses and highrises that encompass it.  Ensuring its survival into the next century will require the strength of spirit and deep commitment of Canadian naturalists everywhere. 

  An environmental biologist and past naturalist at the Living Prairie Museum, George R. Kynman works as a freelance environmental journalist in Manitoba.  </I

    NORTH OR NORTHWEST  
   Choosing the best houseplants for your exposure  
   By Amanda Jarrett  

   Summer can be deadly for houseplants.  With the sun high in the sky and the backyard beckoning, gardening and the other outdoor activities sometimes take precedence over their care.  But now is hardly the time to leave your houseplants to their own devices.  During these hot months most plants (some are dormant during the summer) need more water and food and probably less light as temperatures and light increase. 

   Some plants do well on the same windowsill year after year, but others need to be moved as the seasons change.  When fall becomes winter, light duration and intensity drop, but as the earth moves towards the sun in the spring light intensity and duration increase.  Many of your plants will respond to these changes; it's up to you to gage their response and attend to your plants accordingly. 

   Every day the sun rises in the east and sets in the west.  To select the appropriate houseplant for any one of your windows, it's important to know which direction they face.  The following is a description of the type of light to expect from each exposure and includes a list of the plants that will grow well there. 

   The north  

   There is no direct sun from a north-facing window, but the light is constant and cool.  Many foliage plants benefit from this light level.  </I

   Spring is sprung, the grass is riz...  
   I wonder where the birdies is?  

   Canadians are an odd and fortunate people.  Odd because we spend the better part of every year alternately steeling ourselves against the winter freeze and rushing out in a whirl of scarves and hats to embrace the pleasures of the frozen landscape. 

   Fortunate because every year spring follows winter with only slight irregularity.  Invariably, ever warmer breezes, melting snow and mud lead to new growth.  This renewal of life, however, is too often taken for granted, with little thought given to the consequences that even our most basic actions have on our natural surroundings.  As gardeners, we share the responsibility to contribute to the well-being of the environment by choosing to work our gardens in a healthy manner. 

   With the onslaught of green advertising from every sector of our consumer society, organic gardening methods are undergoing an identity crisis.  In this issue, we've decided to try and put a couple of methods in perspective.  Don Brenneman's report on fertilizers distinguishes between feeding your plants and feeding your soil, and in no uncertain terms lets you know which is better for your garden.  Ken Taylor provides fruit tree growers with a rundown of how and when to use dormant oil sprays to control pest problems. 

   Our feature article is bound to take some of the chill out of winter.  In Canada's Greenhouse, Gisele Grignon discovers that one way to satisfy a craving for the blossoms of summer is to explore the Governor General's greenhouse at Rideau Hall.  There's no pomp and circumstance here, just an 88-acre greenhouse and garden with a rich tradition and an even more vibrant collection of flowers. 

   Brave New Waves by Michael Spillane is full of what every gardener is looking for: sound advice on how to grow bigger and healthier plants.  The focus of the article is Sonic Bloom, a plant enhancer that uses sound frequency together with a nutrient spray to encourage extraordinary growth.  The treatment is available on cassette for home and commercial gardens.  Just imagine the possibilities when it comes out on CD. 

   If you've ever been attracted to the intense beauty and many guises of the begonia, you owe it to yourself to read Carol Sutton's Islands of Colour, because if you've grown one begonia, you certainly haven't grown them all.  Something else you may not have grown is the fava bean, a cool weather legume that has sustained the people of Rome, India and the Middle East for thousands of years.  In Stalking the Exotic Bean, Dan Jason explains why we should be growing the fava, and gives us a taste of how to do it. 

   Randall Prue's Native Delights cuts to the root of another would-be Middle Eastern vegetable, the Jerusalem artichoke.  We've also got an article brimming with tips on how to put together a user-friendly birdhouse.  If that's not enough to keep you busy until spring, keep reading.  There's lots more in the magazine.  We've even included a list of Canadian sources for seeds and catalogues, as well as a very important document: our readership survey.  Please read the magazine, then take a few minutes to fill in the survey.  We'd like to know who you are, what you enjoy, and what aspects of gardening in Canada you'd like to know more about. 

   Jane Pavanel  </I

    Keeping the bloom on some favourite gifts  
 
   LASTING IMPRESSIONS  

  Like harbingers of spring, a multitude of flowering plants become available at this time of year.  Many are popular a gifts, and all appeal to the plant lover looking for a splash of colour or a new plant to care for indoors.  The following six plants are given as gifts more often than any others.  Whether you're doing the buying or the receiving, it helps to know what to look for in the store and then how to care for your plant once it's safely home. 

   By Jean Harris  
  

    Cineraria   
   Resembling daisies, the cheery cineraria is a profuse bloomer whose flowers often completely cover the plant's foliage.  The flowers come in a wide range of both pastel and brilliant colours, in pinks, blues, purples and white, and will last up to three weeks. 

   Water your plant regularly; the mound of blossoms will wilt readily if the soil is allowed to dry out.  Cooler temperatures of 19 degrees C maximum and no direct sun will keep cinerarias happy, and remember not to fertilize while they are in bloom.  After flowering the leaves deteriorate rapidly.  Because cinerarias are annuals and cannot be reflowered, they are usually discarded after blooming.
 

   With patience, cinerarias can be grown from seed.  Sow by summer and gradually pot up the individual plants.  Flower bud initiation occurs during a three-to-four month period where night temperatures cannot exceed 16 degrees C.  If you want to hasten flowering, give your plant long hours of light.  Cinerarias and white flies seem to go together, so keep them isolated from your other plants. 

    Easter lily   

   Easter lilies are gift plants everyone loves; the traditional flower for Easter is the pure white lily, while hybrid lilies in reds, oranges and yellows are marketed for Mother's Day.  When buying, choose a plant with buds to make sure you will have a long flowering period.  Individual blooms will stay attractive for two or three weeks. 

   Place your plant in a bright, cool window and water only when the soil begins to dry.  Daytime temperatures of only 16 to 18 degrees C are preferred, and lilies will benefit by being moved to an even cooler spot at night.  It is believed that removing the yellow pollen-bearing anthers from the center of the flower will help the blooms last longer. 

   Cut off the flowers as they fade.  Lilies can't be brought into bloom again indoors as they have already been forced to flower before their natural season, which is summer.  Although lilies are perennial plants, they are unlikely to overwinter in most areas.  Try keeping them in a bright area until they can be safely planted into a sunny part of the garden where they may bloom again at summer's end without any special treatment. 

    Gardenia   

   For fragrance the gardenia is unsurpassed as an indoor bloomer.  The flowers, which may last up to three weeks, give off a heavy jasmine-like scent and their creamy-white colour contrasts beautifully with the glossy, dark green leaves of this woody plant. 

   Gardenias are so fussy about temperature that they disappoint many would-be growers.  During the day keep these sun lovers in maximum light at 21 to 23 degrees C and at night, 16 to 17 degrees C.  Warmer daytime temperatures will reduce the development of flower buds and will encourage buds to drop, and cooler temperatures during the night will cause leaves to yellow.  Any sudden change in temperature, exposure to drafts or lack of humidity will also cause the buds to drop. 

   To keep these plants healthy a very high humidity level, much higher than is normal in most homes, is essential.  Also, constant moisture and acid conditions are required.  Mist your plant daily or place it on a humidity tray, water as needed, then water monthly with an acid solution of ammonium sulphate (one level teaspoon to one liter of water. 

   Gardenias must be in constant growth to be able to bloom freely.  Feed routinely (every two or three weeks) during active growth but not during the winter months.  If you meet the temperature and humidity requirements of your plant, you will be rewarded with more flowers in the fall and then again in winter.  A stretch of cloudy weather may interrupt flowering. 

    Hydrangea   

   Hydrangeas can only be found around Easter and Mother's Day.  The large, round flower clusters in pastel pink or blue that form at the top of the plant's woody stems are long lasting, staying showy for one or two months.  Easy to keep, hydrangeas require average temperature and humidity and indirect, bright light.  Constant moisture is a must, however, or your plant will deteriorate rapidly.  Soil acidity is relatively neutral for pink blooms (pH 6.2 to 6.5) while blue hydrangeas develop in more acidic conditions (pH 4.5 to 5.0). 

   If you're keeping your plant to reflower next year, prune it back when the flowers have dried up to just above the old wood and water and fertilize monthly throughout the summer.  Buds will form when the plant is kept in a bright spot in temperatures of below 18 degrees C for six weeks.  Further development will occur over the next six weeks (equal to the winter dormancy period) if you keep your plant in continuous darkness at temperatures of 5 to 7 degrees C.  A cold but frost-free garage or cellar is suitable.  Hydrangeas can then be brought into bright light and forced into bloom if kept at 16 degrees C at night and 18 to 21 degrees C during the day for about three months. 

    Miniature orange   

   This citrus plant is everbearing, meaning that it flowers and sets fruit all year long.  Both the flowers, which are sweetly fragrant, and fruit, which can grow up to 2 inches (5 cm) in diameter, can be on the plant at the same time.  The juicy, acidic fruit is edible and can be used in beverages or when making jam as a substitute for lemons and limes. 

   These upright, compact, slow-growing trees demand full sun; without it the foliage will drop and the formation of blossoms will be retarded.  If sufficient light is not available, miniature oranges can be grown successfully under fluorescent lights.  Room temperatures and humidity should be average.  A humus-like, acidic soil that is kept moist but never saturated is best. 

   During periods of active growth be sure to supply a balanced all-purpose fertilizer.  Spending the summer outside will give them a lift.  If flowers fail to develop into fruit, pollinate them yourself using a child's paintbrush by lifting the yellow pollen from the stamens (the thread-like protrusions that are coated in pollen) of one blossom and brushing it on top of the pistil (the bulbous protruding part in the flower's center) of another.  Transplant to a slightly larger pot only when necessary, when the plant becomes pot bound and there is not enough soil to hold the water. 

    Miniature rose   

   Miniature roses, which come in the complete range of rose colours, are delightful for indoor plant culture.  You'll find the largest selection available just before Mother's Day.  Two of the most common are Rosa chinensis, which doesn't exceed one foot (30 cm) in height and bears single blooms that are half an inch to an inch (1 - 3 cm) across and leaves that are equally small, and the taller Rosa X polyantha, which produces one- to two-inch (3 - 5 cm) blooms in clusters.  While some miniatures have a fragrance, many others don't. 

   If provided with maximum light miniature roses will flower continuously.  If sufficient light can't be provided during the winter months, place your plant in a cool or unheated well-lit room to give it a rest period.  Miniatures are best suited to average to cool daytime temperatures and like a nighttime minimum of 10 to 13 degrees C.  The soil, which should be kept moist but not wet, should contain some humus and permit good drainage. 

   To encourage bushiness and more abundant winter blooming, put your plant outdoors for the summer and water and fertilize regularly.  Prune to a symmetrical shape in the fall and reduce watering until new growth appears.  Occasional pruning of the flowering stem will encourage new bud formation.  Side branches that don't bloom should also be pruned to prompt branching.  If your rose is well protected you can plant it permanently in the garden. 

  Jean Harris is an ornamental horticulturist and avid flower arranger.  She has been writing about plants for some 15 years.  <I

    BREATHTAKING BEAUTIES  
  Stapeliads may be fair of face, with stunning star-shaped flowers, but their smell can run afoul of your senses 
   By Robert E. Wrigley  
   , what died?  </I
<I
  It is a real privilege to be doing something you love so much,'she says.

   Dr. Anthony Burke, another member of University of Victoria's astronomy group, has in the past undertaken significant theoretical studies on the formation of stars and on the interstellar medium, which is the diffuse gas between stars.  Recently he has concentrated on teaching and administration.  He arrived at the university in 1968, has served on the Senate for most of the past ten years, and is the current chair of the Senate Honorary Degrees Committee.  

   Dr. Jeremy Tatum and Dave Balam, a research assistant who has been at University of Victoria for 14 years, work as a team to observe asteroids (which are referred to as minor planets), comets and other bodies in space.  The astronomers make measurements of the objects' positions and compute their orbits.  This aspect of the discipline is called astrometry, and Tatum says that Balam is 'one of the finest astrometrists that Canada has ever produced.' 

   Tatum and Balam form one of only about eighteen observing teams in the world, and there are even fewer orbital computing teams, Balam says.  Usually the two functions are performed by distinct groups, but the University of Victoria duo is diversified enough to do both. 

   Tatum and Balam have several tasks, one of the most significant of which is observing minor planets which have been provisionally numbered by the international Minor Planet Center.  Tatum and Balam calculate precision orbits so that the objects may be permanently numbered.  They also obtain precise positions of short period comets.  The most timely of their objectives is to provide rapid astrometry for newly-discovered comets and unusual asteroids in response to telegrams from the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams of the International Astronomical Union in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  They are often able to provide this information within a few hours of receiving a telegram. 

   'The main emphasis in the study of the solar system is on what things are, but first you have to know where they are,' Balam says.  'We find things so that others can study them.' 

   A central irony in the discipline is captured by Balam when he says, 'Over the years, I have seen only three of the things I have worked with: comet Halley and two others.'  While many astronomers are drawn to the field by their love of looking at the stars, like John Climenhaga, once they enter the field as professionals their major contact with stellar objects is by looking at photographic plates or CCD-generated images.  Even for people who are primarily observers, computations are much more a part of their daily astronomical routine than staring into space.  

   That romantic notion of astronomy is not lost completely, however.  Chris Spratt, who is a gardener with University of Victoria Buildings and Grounds, is one of the world's foremost amateur astronomers.  He carries his eight-inch Schmidt-Cassegrain telescope around with him, and 'can't pass by a clear night without looking at something.'  Most clear evenings Spratt, who lives in a condominium that does not afford good viewing, will drive to Cattle Point or a friend's house and observe for two to three hours.  He says that September through October and March through April are the best times of year for visual observations. 

   Spratt also works in conjunction with Balam and Tatum.  He receives the coordinates of a comet from them, then is able to locate it with his telescope.  He gathers information, especially on new comets, and enters it into a computer at home.  Spratt is able to measure the magnitude of a comet and to make visual observations about unusual activity in variable stars.  'In a way I feel like I'm helping the scientists,' he says.  'Also, for thousands of years humans revered the stars.  At one time, mankind was geared to the stars and was more attuned to nature.  I've had this interest since I was about nine,'spratt says, and he finally managed to get his own telescope when he was 15.  'My mother thought I was a bit off,' because of his interest in stars, he adds.  

   Spratt's success as an amateur astronomer should certainly have allayed any fears that he is 'a bit off.'  He has received the Chant Medal and the Ken Chilton Prize, both of which are awarded by the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, in recognition of his visual observations of comets, variable stars, asteroids, and eclipses.  He was named the top variable star observer in the world in 1976-77 and was second in 1980-81.  He has published numerous papers in The Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, The Journal of the American Association of Variable Star Observers, and Astronomy Magazine.  He has also written editorials for lay readers that have appeared in the Globe and Mail. 

   Tatum says of the astronomers at University of Victoria, 'We tend to be pretty much individual scientists doing what we want to do and being successful at it.'  Students who have come through the University of Victoria astronomy program are beginning to make their mark in the world of astronomy as well.  Tatum says that in his reading of the literature in the field, he has begun to see a number of University of Victoria astronomy graduates publishing important papers.  'They are becoming good astronomers in their own right,' he says. 

   Staff of the Climenhaga Observatory are also making University of Victoria's program accessible to younger students.  Lab instructor Russ Robb is an eager and enthusiastic tour guide for high school students and others who choose to view the dome as part of a campus tour.  He demonstrates the power of the sun's heat by placing a pencil under the ray reflected by a small telescope on the Elliot Building roof.  The pencil immediately beings to smoke and is on the verge of bursting into flames when he pulls it out of the ray.  He then shows guests the inside of the dome and explains the operation of the main telescope; if Venus or some other body is visible on the day of the tour, he will focus the telescope on it to give the guests an extra treat. 

   Humans have always been fascinated by the sky and what lies beyond our world.  Astronomers at University of Victoria have become international leaders in the quest to know and understand the origins, history, and secrets of the universe. 

 </I

 <I
   If flowering plants become leggy and pale, refuse to flower and lean towards a light source, move them to an east window where they will get more light.  Plants in a north window in the summer may have to be moved to a brighter location in the winter. 

  The east 
   Many plants benefit from the cool morning sun that radiates through an east-facing window.  Eaves and overhangs lessen the duration of direct sun from this exposure.  If you are unsure about a plant's light requirements, an east window is a safe bet.  It receives up to four hours of sun per day, which many flowering plants appreciate. 

  The south 
   The seasonal variation in light from the south is greater than any other exposure.  In the summer, bright, direct light fills the room and is at its most intense at midday.  Tropical flowering plants, cacti and succulents do well in this window. 

  The west 
   Even though the sun is not at its highest in this window, it is at its hottest for four hours in the afternoon.  Cacti, succulents and some tropical foliage plants do well here.  West-facing windows are not always hot because elevation and latitude play an important role in light intensity, which is higher in the mountains, where the air is thinner, than at sea level. 


   Many tropical flowering plants do well with a western exposure during the summer.  If possible, cacti and succulents should be moved to a window that faces south in the winter.  

  Hanging plants 
   Many hanging plants may suffer from too little light even when placed in a bright, sunny window.  When ceilings are high and windows are low the plant dangles above the light.  To rectify this, attach brackets to the wall beside the window and hang the plant there, tie a rope to the hanger to lengthen it or select plants that need less light. 

  Skylights 
   Many people have skylights in their homes, which add extra light for plants to grow.  How big the skylight is and how far it is from the ceiling of the room to the top of the skylight determines the type of plant that should be placed there. 

   Some openings are over six feet (2 m) from the ceiling to the roof of the house, which allows for limited light.  To grow plants up the shaft is an appealing idea but it's hard to maintain the plants.  Note the hours of direct sun and the intensity of light the skylight receives and select plants accordingly. 

 </I

 <I
   But Ronald Worton, geneticist-in-chief at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, said that, until recently, various organizations that fund Canadian scientific studies, including the National Research Council, the Medical Research Council (MRC) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), have as yet been unable to agree on which agency should provide the money, or where the money will come from.  One problem is that agencies want specific research proposals, which scientists say they need money to provide.  Said Worton: 'It's a fairly complex undertaking that can't be presented as a regular research proposal, or funded from the existing pot.  So nobody is quite sure where to start.' 

   The global project that Canadian scientists want to join is aimed at producing, by the early 21st century, a complete so-called map, actually a huge chart, showing the exact molecular sequence of about 100,000 genes, the genetic code-carrying units that are embedded in the deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, that makes up the core of human cells.  Each gene contains part of the overall genetic blueprint that determines the physical makeup of all forms of life.  The information is encoded in combinations of four chemical 'bases,' as scientists call them - adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine.  Each piece of genetic information directs cells to produce proteins that determine everything from the height of a man and the color of his hair, to the shape of a woman's foot and her tendency to develop certain illnesses.  In all  , a total of three billion DNA bases are involved in determining human characteristics. 

   The project that involves charting each of the bases and the genes they make up, so that doctors will some day know exactly which gene is responsible for every function of the human body, is the first comprehensive project to embrace the science of molecular biology.  The brainchild of Robert Sinsheimer, then chancellor of the University of California at Santa Cruz, the idea attracted the attention in 1986 of James Watson, the American biologist who, with British biologist Francis Crick, discovered the molecular structure of the DNA molecule in 1953.  In 1988, the Bethesda, Md.-based U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) established an office of human genome research, led by Watson, to co-ordinate American efforts to map the genome. 

   Despite the delay in establishing a Canadian contribution to the project, Canada is a highly regarded participant in genetic research.  Last August, doctors at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children located the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis, a fatal disorder that affects one in every 2,000 children and causes excess mucus to clog the lungs and digestive system.  The team leader was Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui, who says a complete genome map would have allowed the discovery to take place three years earlier.  'Right now, scientists have to start locating genes again with each new project,' he said.  Tsui and other supporters say the proposed computerized map would eliminate that need, increasing scientific efficiency and enabling small labs to work in complex genetics. 

   The same hospital's Worton is a member of the executive of the Human Genome Organization, a Geneva-based group of about 250 scientists from two dozen countries that was set up last year to promote international collaboration in the genome effort.  Said Worton: 'Canada is a world leader, so people will naturally ask why we're dragging our feet on a project that will have huge payoffs for the public and industry.'  Last October, Worton helped to write a general proposal for Canadian genome research, which called for grants from Ottawa of between $25 million and $50 million during the next five years. 

 </I




   DOCTORING  
  Tinkering with the stuff of life, scientists are on the edge of engineering cures for the deadliest diseases of our time 
  Article by MARK WITTEN

   AT 8 O'CLOCK ON THE MORNING OF June 5, 1992, DENISE ROCHEAU, A 28-YEAR-OLD QUEBEC CITY woman, was wheeled into an operating room at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.  A heavy black mask was placed over her nose and mouth, and taking direction, she began inhaling deep drafts of an anaesthetic.  Waiting for the patient to lose consciousness, a team of about a dozen medical experts, briefed to the final detail, made a last inspection of the high-tech apparatus scattered around the room.  Off to the side, the team's leader, Jim Wilson, a tall, boyish-looking doctor, watched intently. 

   A mother who worked as a seam-stress and part-time bank teller, Denise (a pseudonym to conceal her identity) suffered from a deadly inherited heart disorder called familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH).  FH is caused by the lack of an essential gene in the liver that helps remove "bad" cholesterol - the type that sticks to artery walls and clogs blood vessels - from the bloodstream.  The disease had already killed two of her brothers and had been responsible for her heart attack at the age of 16.  Either with great faith or in great desperation, Denise agreed to be a human guinea pig in a medical fantasy now being brought to life by gene therapist Jim Wilson.  She was gambling that Wilson and his team could safely treat the disease by replacing her fatally flawed genes with new ones.  Failure could cost Denise her life.  Success would usher in a revolution in modern medicine more sweeping than the discovery of vaccines or antibiotics. 

   With clinical precision, lead surgeon Steve Raper dragged his scalpel across Denise's skin just below the rib cage, producing a crimson streak.  Raper then cut through layers of abdominal tissue until he reached his target, Denise's liver.  He paused, probed for a lobe of the vital organ, and cut away a 255-gram section while the assisting surgeon hastened to stop the bleeding.  To the naked eye, there was nothing to suggest that this hand-sized slab of pinkish brown tissue harboured a fatal genetic defect that caused Denise to have cholesterol levels three times greater than normal.  The severed lobe hung from a pair of forceps and then dropped into a plastic bag that rested in a basin filled with ice.  Wilson grabbed the container, tucked it under his arm like a football, and rushed to a laboratory where his colleague, Mariann Grossman, was ready to begin the exacting process of inserting healthy genes into the patient's liver. 

   It would take four intense days of activity in the medical centre's laboratories, operating room, and intensive-care unit before the gene-therapy procedure was completed, and several months more before Wilson was certain that the new genes were bringing about a lasting improvement in Denise's cholesterol levels.  Early this spring, nearly two years after the operation, Wilson, Grossman, and their gene-therapy team made medical history when they published the results of the experiment in the scientific journal Nature Genetics.  Their landmark report, which made front-page headlines around the world, was the first to show the lasting therapeutic benefits of gene therapy for a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease. 

   Wilson was able to report that Denise's harmful-cholesterol levels had dropped by almost 20 percent after gene therapy and that the level of "good" cholesterol was raised significantly.  She was administered a cholesterol-lowering drug, which had not worked prior to the treatment, and her harmful cholesterol dropped by about 30 percent overall from pre-treatment levels, although it still remained at more than twice normal levels.  The most encouraging news, however, was that her cholesterol had remained low for the full 28 months since she had received the treatment.  Since Denise's operation, four other FH patients have undergone Wilson's experimental gene therapy: a 12-year-old boy from Cyprus, an 8-year-old girl from Colombia, an 11-year-old girl from China, and a 41-year-old woman from Quebec.  The results of these treatments should be known by the end of 1994. 

   "We've demonstrated the long-term safety and effectiveness of gene therapy in this patient," says Wilson. "By doing so, we have opened the doors for the potential of gene therapy in treating various forms of inherited lethal disorders.  I believe that gene therapy will become a part of every medical discipline." 

   At 39, Jim Wilson is in the vanguard of a generation of scientists whose ability to manipulate and reconstruct DNA in the laboratory gives them the power to alter the genetic makeup of people.  In biological terms, gene therapy uses DNA information technology to re-program human cells in the hope of correcting critical genetic-coding errors.  A few years ago, the idea of using gene therapy to treat patients with life-threatening diseases was an exciting but only theoretical possibility.  Today, gene therapy is one of the hottest areas of medical research.  More than 70 clinical trials are under way in the United States, Great Britain, Italy, and China, and a number of tests are being planned across Canada.  Trials include Wilson's treatment of five FH patients and a second major test in which he plans to treat 22 patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common genetic disease among Caucasians. 

   Gene therapy excites medical researchers because, in theory, it offers a way to treat the root cause of any inherited disease, including many fatal illnesses for which there is currently no effective treatment or cure.  Instead of treating the symptoms that result from a genetic defect, gene therapy seeks to correct the problem at the source and, in this way, provide a lasting cure.  Gene therapy offers new hope in the seemingly one-sided battle against some 4,000 inherited diseases that are known to result from a defective single gene.  The better-known ones include muscular dystrophy, CF, sickle-cell anaemia, Tay-Sachs disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). 

   The potential applications of gene therapy go far beyond single-gene disorders.  Genetic defects are also known or suspected to play a role in society's most common and deadliest diseases, including many types of cancer, Alzheimer's disease, haemophilia, and diabetes.  In many instances, the underlying genetic basis of the illness is not yet understood and may involve a complex interaction of several genes.  As the processes become known, researchers hope that gene therapy will help correct the conditions. 

   But for all its huge promise, human gene therapy has been thin on hard clinical data to show that it works.  Scientists such as 57-year-old French Anderson, who led the first government-approved human gene-therapy trial four years ago, have been theorizing about it since the late 1960s.  That's when Anderson sent an article on the subject to The New England Journal of Medicine, where it was rejected after a heated debate. 

   Why did it take 25 years before Jim Wilson could successfully apply the concept of gene therapy for the first time?  In theory, the idea is simple: Just insert a healthy gene to do the work of a defective gene.  In reality, gene therapy is anything but simple.  First, scientists must find and clone the right gene among a hundred thousand others packed into the DNA in each human cell.  Second, they must be able to deliver the right genes safely into the right target cells, in either the bloodstream, liver, lung, or brain.  Then they must get the transplanted genes to work properly in order to correct the biochemical breakdown that causes the disease. 

   Finding a gene is enormously difficult.  As the basic units of heredity, genes are segments of DNA in the nucleus of each cell that contain instructions to make proteins, the basic building blocks of life.  The famous DNA double helix is a winding molecular ladder three billion rungs long.  A specific gene can be a segment of DNA that is as short as a thousand rungs or as long as several hundred thousand rungs.  Gene hunter Francis Collins likes to observe that locating a gene is much harder than finding a needle in a haystack.  The needle stands out because it looks different, but a gene is just another piece of DNA. 

   Until the 1980s, only a few of the genes that cause single-gene disorders had been cloned.  These included the adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene that causes severe combined immune deficiency (SCID); the gene that causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a rare degenerative disease of the nervous system; and the beta globin gene that causes thalassaemia, a deadly blood disorder common among Mediterranean peoples. 

   At first, each of these diseases was considered a potential candidate for human gene therapy.  The idea was so tantalizing that Martin Cline, a brilliant and ambitious California scientist, conducted a rogue experimental gene-therapy trial in the summer of 1980.  Cline, who had been denied permission to conduct human trials in the United States, secretly flew to Israel and Italy, where he inserted beta globin genes into two young women afflicted with thalassaemia.  As it turned out, Cline had also misled the Israeli ethics-review committee about the methods he was using.  The research superstar lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in grants after U.S. funding authorities found out about the tests. 

   The Cline fiasco highlighted both the severe technical limitations of gene therapy at the time and the need for a new government regulatory body to review the technical and ethical merits of any proposed human gene-therapy trials in the future. In 1980, scientists had not cloned many genes, nor had they developed effective methods for transferring genes into human cells and getting those genes to work.  The technical hurdles were so great that in 1981, French Anderson, one of gene therapy's strongest proponents, abandoned research for several years.  With Anderson temporarily out of the field, Richard Mulligan, a young researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Boston, filled the void.   He showed that specialized retroviruses could perform the critical job of delivering genes into animal and then human cells and getting the genes to work.  The retroviruses, really bundles of genes and proteins, act like molecular delivery vans that attach to a target cell and then insert the healthy gene that they carry into the DNA of the host cell.  In Mulligan's laboratory, genetically engineered mouse leukemia retroviruses successfully delivered human genes into mouse DNA.  The finding electrified the still young gene-therapy field. 

   In the fall of 1990, French Anderson, Michael Blaese, and Kenneth Culver at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland, performed the first human gene-therapy trial when they treated two girls with SCID.  The girls were born with a mutant chromosone that kept them from producing the ADA enzyme.  Without the enzyme, the body cannot produce new T-cells (a type of white blood cell) to fight disease, leaving the children defenceless against infection.  In a widely publicized experiment, the NIH team used genetically engineered retroviruses to put normal ADA genes into the girls' deficient T-cells.  The hope was that the children's new T-cells would begin making enough ADA to boost their immune systems.  Four years after the initial treatments, the first gene-therapy trial remains controversial because no scientific paper has been published showing the trial's results. 

   Scientists were just learning how to manipulate genes when Wilson entered the University of Michigan's M.D./Ph.D. program in 1978, but it was an area that fascinated him.  As part of his research with geneticist Bill Kelley, Wilson helped discover the genetic flaw that causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a devastating inherited disease that leads to mental retardation and compulsive self-mutilation in boys.  Wilson vividly recalls how excited and happy he was when he told families whose children had Lesch-Nyhan about his discovery of the mutant gene, only to be greeted with disappointment from one mother: "She didn't respond.  Then she asked me, "How will this help my kids?" "  All Wilson could say was, "It won't."  To treat Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, gene therapists must overcome the huge obstacle of effectively delivering genes into brain cells.  The incident brought home to Wilson very early in his career the huge gap between finding and fixing a gene. 

   During the 1980s, Wilson eagerly followed the viral-engineering break-throughs of Richard Mulligan.  </I
   Last Call?  
  The cry of the loon is a symbol of the Canadian wilderness.  The less we hear it, the more it tells us about the declining state of our mutual home. 
  Essay by JEFF FAIRCHK - there' another name at the end...

   AT NOON ON A DAY IN LATE May, I drive my little skiff into the northernmost bay of Aziscohos Lake, a hydroelectric reservoir not far from the Quebec border in western Maine.  Right on schedule: I have spent half the day wandering along the western shoreline, spying on loon pairs and recording evidence of nesting, and will spend the remainder floating leisurely back down the east side with an eye out for my charges.  Someone has to do it, and I happen to like the work. 

   For 11 years, I was employed by the Audubon Society of New Hampshire as chief biologist and philosopher of its loon-recovery project.  Now I work directly for the loons and am paid for my efforts largely by power companies, which are inspired by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in Washington, D.C., to worry about how water-level changes on their impounded lakes affect the resident loons and their reproductive success.  Consultant seems too formal, too brassy a title.  Call me an independent biologist. 
 
   This large bay is the territory belonging to and protected by a pair of loons that I've known for eight years as the Little Magalloway Pair.  They are fishing out in the middle when I arrive.  I motor off to a far corner with a view of the entire territory, sun at my back, and shut off the outboard.  Through binoculars, I watch them diving.  They alternate, each dive lasting less than a minute.  I suspect that eventually one of them will move toward their nest.  Ten minutes into the program, as if by coincidence, the two dive together.  A full minute passes.  Two, three, Five.  Under these conditions - lightly overcast sky, calm water the colour of wet concrete - a child could spot the black periscope-like head of a loon from a kilometre away. 

   I see nothing.  I pour a cup of coffee from my thermos, eat my sandwich.  Still nothing.  I pour more coffee, finish lunch, all the while watching.  Half an hour later, I still have not seen them.  The loons have disappeared. 

   Pretty crafty.  But not surprising.  Much of our attraction to the loon, after all, derives from its clandestine behaviours.  Nothing like a taste of the unknown, the mysterious, to haunt the human mind with intrigue and inspire it toward romance.  However, there is a dark side to our romance with the loon.  These days, many of us feel a powerful and unrequited longing for this wild spirit on lakes from which it has disappeared completely, chased off by human meddling or poisoned out by toxins we have dealt upon the landscape.  But this loss only inspires a greater affection: across Canada, a large network of vigilantes now monitors and fosters the loon's survival.  Why such a spirited effort? 

   "Canadians have a historical gravitation toward loons," a paddler in the outback of Ontario once explained to me. "Our national expansion was along waterways, by canoe.  We identify with the call of the loon." 

  

   And exactly what is it about the call of the loon, I asked.  "There's a certain piercing, haunting quality that tells you there is still life out there," he said.  "Wild life."  Then he paused. "Sometimes there's something ... almost human to it." 

   The loon I refer to here is the common loon, Gavia immer, provincial bird of Ontario, or huart a collier ( "cry in a necklace" ) to French Canadians.  Three to seven kilograms of gristle, dance, fish oil, feather, web, wail, and deception.  Not to be confused with the little red-throated loon of ponds along the subarctic coast and on the tundra, the Pacific loon of larger, deeper lakes of northern Canada west of Hudson Bay, or the yellow-billed loon of the far north. 

   The common loon nests on lakes and ponds throughout the boreal forest across North America.  In Canada, its heartland, it numbers between a quarter- and a half-million birds.  Its beauty is one more part of its allure.  Sexes are similar, their backs and sides spangled white on a field of black and otherwise adorned with two necklaces of legendary origin, one black dagger of a beak, glowing white breast, and eyes redder than rubies set in a black head, sleek as satin, known by aficionados to reflect dark iridescent green when seen up close under a particular angle of sunlight.  Every part has its purpose - even the gaudy chessboard back serves as camouflage on sun-dappled water or on the nest under the stippled shadows of willow or blueberry. 

   The ecologist's eye discerns yet a different kind of beauty, that of a superbly designed organism engineered, in this case, to catch fish.  The graceful shape allows torpedolike speed under water, powered by two huge feet set as far aft as possible for optimal leverage.   The loon's bones are solid and heavy; by flattening its feathers to remove interstitial air, a loon can make itself heavier than water and sink vertically.  Though their pulmonary air capacity may last only a few minutes, loons have been captured in fish traps 60 metres down. 

   The loon pays in trade-offs for these specialties.  Because its feet are set so far back on its heavy body, it moves awkwardly on land.  It builds its nest at the Water's edge, therefore, and can gain flight only from a liquid runway.  A frightened loon will not fly, it will dive. 

   And to good avail: a loon can slip beneath the surface of a large, quiet lake on a clear day and disappear forever.  How does it do it?  At some indeterminable distance and direction, the escaping loon raises just its bill above the surface, grabs a quick breath, and resubmerges, leaving not a ripple.  I saw it once, by luck, through my cheap Sears 7 x 35 extrawide-angle field glasses.  A series of these fast-snorkeled breaths allows a loon to put kilometres between itself and the dumbfounded human observer. 

   More alluring than its physical beauty is the cry of the loon, lorn and lonely, reaching you as you stand on shore under a wine-coloured sky, feeling much the same.  A single wail at first.  Then another, followed by yet others, excitement growing, blending into a chorus of laughter and shrieking until the night is redundant with ancient emotion. 

   Acoustic biologists have identified four distinctly meaningful calls: the hoot (a quiet contact call uttered among individuals close together), the wail ("Where are you? ... Come here"), the tremolo (a quavering cry signifying alarm), and the yodel (most radically insane of all, given by males to establish territory or express extreme alarm, as when a chick is threatened). 

   In native legends across Canada, the loon's calls forewarned of storms or presaged the resurrection of a human soul.  They were calls between lovers, for the return of a companion, of joy at being awarded those lovely necklaces in return for restoring sight to a blind human.  Ojibwa warriors heard promise of victory.  Cree heard the voices of their dead.  Our cold-hearted behavioural scientists postulate that the wild nighttime choruses are a function of territorial behaviour.  Perhaps so.  But why not consider deeper emotions?  Joy?  Celebration?  Camaraderie? 

   Through the season, I drop in on the Little Magalloway Pair, watching for the sequence of behaviours typical of nesting loons.  Shortly after ice-out, the male arrives to establish the territory with song and dance.  Then the female comes, and the two remain on the lake, often close together, after the migrants pass through.  In late May or early June, you begin to notice only one bird at a time.  If you are lucky, you may hear a solitary wail and see a second bird arrive just before the first disappears to take its shift at incubation. 

   But I do not see this sequence with the Little Magalloway Pair.  Instead, I observe two birds - when I see them at all - out on the water together.  No hint of incubation.   No nest, no eggs at any of their traditional nesting sites.  I've seen it before.  Even the most productive pairs take a year off from family responsibilities once in a while, primarily to aggravate the local loon biologist. 

   In early September, I am showing off my study area to a loon biologist from Alaska, attempting to appear proficient at my trade.  When we reach the Little Magalloway territory, I explain that this pair has failed to nest this year.  "That's odd," says my companion, peering through her binoculars.  "They have a chick with them."  I take a look.  They've lied to me again. 

   This was all two years ago, and I never did find the nest.  Not that I needed to.  As my Alaskan friend pointed out, a chick is a fairly strong indication that an egg had been laid.  Nor did I mind the subterfuge.  I had studied loons for only 16 years at the time.  Had a lot to learn.  Still do.  No one knows, for example, which loons occupy which portions of their broad winter range, whether young adults return to their natal areas, why some lakes that offer apparently good loon habitat remain vacant, or how many chicks a loon pair must raise in a lifetime in order to balance attrition.  For decades, we believed that loon pairs fiercely maintained fidelity toward both mate and territory.  Then a young biologist, Dave Evers, working out of Whitefish Point Bird Observatory on Lake Superior, fashioned a technique for catching loons to colour-band them so that individuals could be recognized.  Early results indicate that at least one-fifth of his banded birds switch mates or sneak onto other territories each year.  One wonders what else remains veiled in the loon's mystique. 

   The common loon may live to be 25 or 30 years old.  Typical of long-lived birds, the loon lays a small clutch - nearly always two eggs - and gives its young full care through the summer.  Both mates participate in everything but egg laying.  A loon may ride the young on its back or disappear with them after hatching.  But the mystical nature of this creature does not always work in its favour.  Loons will dance and sing in the summer twilight, year after year, informing the night and our dreams with their presence while never revealing a chronic failure in reproduction.  Until one spring, in their absence, there reigns an empty and terrible silence. 

   Is it possible that the common loon, this stable creature with 60 million years of evolutionary fine-tuning, signature voice and spirit of Canada's wilds, symbol of this vast and haunting land that the entire continent once thought was inviolable, is disappearing from its haunts? 

   By 1981, the southern Ontario country once described as "a vast uninhabited solitude" by 19th-century naturalist Charles Fathergill had suffered enough human habits and habitation to turn away its native loon population.  This prompted the Long Point Bird Observatory in Port Rowan to form its Ontario Lakes Loon Survey, later to become the nationwide Canadian Lakes Loon Survey, now under the direction of biologist Harry Vogel and empowered by 3,500 volunteers from Nova Scotia to the Yukon.  The survey records the presence and breeding success of loons from volunteers' reports and provides information to the public.  I asked Vogel about the status of the loon in Ontario.  The southern edge of its breeding range is still receding, he told me.  Why?  Well, he said, human behavior. 

   Not the mere presence of humans but the behaviour of our modern monoculture - the incredible busy-ness we inflict upon our public waters.  Not only is loon habitat lost to shoreline development, but nesting sites are disturbed - by berry pickers, picnickers, part-time naturalists, canoeists and rowboaters, clandestine lovers, anglers, and campers - frequently enough to frighten the loons off their clutch of eggs and dissuade them from returning.  Similar human blunders separate adult loons from their chicks, leaving the little ones susceptible to predation or eventual starvation. 

   Dieter Schoenfeld is a charter volunteer member of the Loon Survey who with his wife, Marlies, monitors loon populations and reproduction on 10 lakes in the Sudbury area, including McFarlane, on which they live.  </I
  A DISCOURAGING WORD: Diseased bison trigger a stormy debate 

   Almost 60 million of the majestic animals once roamed the forests and flatlands of North America.  But European settlers brought a brutal end to that era when they killed off nearly all of the continent's bison.  By 1885, fewer than 1,000 remained.  Now, the world's largest free-ranging herd consists of an estimated 4,000 bison (the animals are widely, but erroneously, referred to as buffalo) that live under federal protection in northern Alberta.  But until last week, when federal cabinet ministers intervened with a promise to look for alternatives, the bison seemed destined for mass slaughter.  The drastic measure was proposed by a federally appointed panel that said that many of the bison are dangerously diseased. 

   The recommendation to systematically exterminate the entire herd in Wood Buffalo National Park created a storm of controversy over Canadian wildlife policy.  If, as the Aug. 29 federal report said, at least half of the bison are carrying tuberculosis or brucellosis (a disease that causes pregnant bison to abort), they might infect other wild bison.  Also at risk are domestic cattle, which come into contact with bison that often wander outside the park.  Brucellosis spreads when animals graze in pastures contaminated by the afterbirth of ailing female bison.  Tuberculosis can spread to other animals by airborne contact or through tainted water.  Agriculture officials said that the epidemic could arouse U.S. suspicions about Canadian beef, forcing Ottawa to spend millions of dollars on inspection tests. 

   As a result, some federal officials say that the bison should be slaughtered.  But the proposal led to widespread protests by naturalists and native groups, who claimed that there was not sufficient proof of widespread illness among the animals.  As the controversy deepened, Environment Minister Robert de Cotret came to the animals' rescue.  "I don't think the solution is to go out and shoot," said de Cotret after meeting with native groups in Edmonton.  "What we want is a healthy herd, and there are other ways to get that." 

   Still, some wildlife experts contend that extermination is the best way to prevent the contamination of other herds.  The scientists say that tuberculosis and brucellosis are difficult to detect, and can lie dormant for years.  They also claim that rampant disease (according to some estimates, as many as 80 per cent of the bison are infected) has helped to reduce the herd to fewer than 4,000 from more than 12,000 a few decades ago.  Said Stacy Tessaro, a veterinary research scientist with Agriculture Canada in Saskatoon: "It comes down to emotion versus scientific assessments.  Nobody wants to destroy an animal, but we have no vaccine and no way to cure it." 

   To bolster their arguments, agriculture experts point to a similar epidemic of tuberculosis among water buffalo in northern Australia.  Officials had 7,000 infected animals killed in about 146 square miles of dense jungle between 1983 and 1985.  "Complete depopulation was cheaper and a lot less painful to the animals," said William Bulmer, the Ottawa-based director of animal health for Agriculture Canada.  "Thorough management will solve the problem, whereas inaction could mean the extinction of wood buffalo." 

   For their part, defenders of the bison say that no one really knows how many animals are infected by disease.  Opponents of the proposed slaughter include some Alberta-based employees at Parks Canada who, late last month, released an unofficial memo that condemned the findings of the environmental assessment review panel.  In their memo, the employees said that the allegations of widespread disease may be unfounded because the most recent thorough study of the herd took place in 1975.  As well, the memo's authors claimed that the proposed slaughter put the interests of cattle farmers above the integrity of Canada's national parks.  But agriculture experts say that the risk of contamination to cattle could prove more costly in the long run.  Officials declared Canada's 14 million cattle free of brucellosis in 1985 and expect them to be rid of tuberculosis by next year, creating greater export opportunities in the United States and fewer inspection requirements.  Federal officials say that Ottawa's $500-million fight to eradicate both diseases in cattle may now be in jeopardy because of the Wood Buffalo herd.  Said John Kellar, Ottawa-based associate director of disease control at Agriculture Canada: "We might risk our reputation for safe beef exports.  Slaughter seems drastic, but it's the only way to solve this." 

   Meanwhile, Agriculture Minister Donald Mazankowski supported de Cotret in opposing the proposed mass slaughter. Mazankowski said that he plans to seek cabinet support for a quarantine and partial slaughter of the animals instead.  That approach drew support from some naturalists and wildlife experts who say that mass slaughter would be a destructive solution to an exaggerated problem.  Said Lindsay Wasylyshyn, vice-president of the Metis Association in Fort Smith, N.W.T., just across the Alberta border from Wood Buffalo Park: "Those buffalo are part of a food chain that extends from the wolves on down to the bugs.  Destroy them and you destroy the whole ecosystem."  But, without a cure or vaccine on the horizon, many of the park's bison may still be facing a death sentence.  </I

   A battle for control: Islanders take on the mighty Irving empire 

   During the 1860s, violent riots broke out on Prince Edward Island as tenant farmers tried to gain ownership from absentee British landlords who controlled the island's farmland.  The farmers eventually succeeded.  But now, Island farmers are up in arms again over what they claim is an attempt by a single, powerful family to gain control over a large block of P.E.I. farmland.  The dispute places Premier Joseph Ghiz, who is also the province's justice minister, in opposition to billionaire industrialist K. C. Irving and one of his granddaughters.  In April, Ghiz wrote to Mary Jean Irving, telling her and her husband, Stewart Dockendorff, that he had reason to believe they had acquired more land than the province permitted and ordered them to divest themselves of some of it.  If Irving is charged and found guilty of contravening the Lands Protection Act, she could face a fine of $5,000 or up to six months in jail. 

   Ghiz is placing the resources of his tiny island against the mighty Saint John, N.B.-based Irving industrial empire, with an estimated $10 billion in assets in 1989.  Irving interests now own or control nearly 25,000 acres of P.E.I. cropland - about six per cent of the provincial total.  Said Daniel Hendricken, who farms 125 acres of land near Fanningbrook, 35 km east of Charlottetown: "Island farmers fought hard to get control of their land.  Now, we're losing it again." 

   Since 1971, the Irving family plant at Cavendish Farms at New Annan, 62 km southwest of Charlottetown, has processed potatoes grown on 3,000 acres of their land and another 17,000 acres leased or controlled by them.  In April, Conservative opposition leader Leone Bagnall declared that Mary Jean Irving and her husband had purchased 4,800 additional acres of farmland individually and on behalf of Indian River Farms Ltd., the corporation they control. (Under Island law at the time, corporations could own a maximum of 3,000 acres; individuals could own 1,000 acres each.)  Bagnall's revelation led 135 Island farmers to stage a protest march in Charlottetown on April 23.  Said James Rodd, a regional co-ordinator for the National Farmers Union: "We don't want to go back to the time on P.E.I. when we were tenants." 

   Pressed to take action, Ghiz's Liberal government rushed a bill through the legislature limiting future corporate acquisitions to five acres.  For her part, Mary Jean Irving, who has until July 22 to reply to Ghiz's letter, insists that there is no connection between her grandfather's empire and the land she and her husband own.  Meanwhile, the dispute may have contributed to a slowdown in Irving investments.  Some Islanders say that a planned expansion of Cavendish Farms was put on hold after Ghiz's government began taking on the mighty Irving empire.  </I

   MYSTERY IN THE FIELDS: Experts study bizarre marks on the ground 

   Jennifer Skinner says that only aliens could have caused what happened in her wheat field outside of Lethbridge, Alta.  Skinner's son-in-law, Cyril Hubbard, was the first member of the family to spot the strange occurrence: on Sept. 1, while harvesting in a field, he noticed two 15-foot-wide circles connected by paths to a 20-foot-wide circle.  "I don't like it," said Skinner after viewing the site.  quote "There's no tracks, nothing.  This has been done from the air somehow.  It makes me nervous."  Skinner's is one of at least six mysterious "crop circle sites" that have appeared in southern Alberta fields since Aug. 21.  Circles of flattened grain have been reported in hundreds of locations across North America, Britain and Australia.  Researchers are baffled by the phenomenon.  Says Herman Austenson, a professor of crop sciences at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon who studied a site near North Battleford, Sask.: "I can tell you one thing - it absolutely is not a hoax.  But what caused it, I don't know." 

   In Canada, the first crop circles were reported in Langenburg, Sask., in 1974.  In the past two years, about 20 more circles have been found in Saskatchewan and Alberta, and more have been reported across the western United States.  The largest concentration of circles is in England.  According to Ralph Noyes, secretary of the 800-member, year-old Centre for Crop Circle Studies in London, scientists have documented more than 1,000 so-called circle events in Britain.  About half of those have occurred in a 20-square-mile corner of the southern English county of Wiltshire.  There, Britons have seen and photographed an assortment of patterns of flattened grain. 

   Theories about the causes of crop circles range from unconfirmed assumptions about extraterrestrial spaceships allegedly hovering over agricultural land to scientific explanations involving lightning, magnetic fields and unusual wind patterns.  Ieuan Evans, a supervisor in the Alberta government's plant-diseases section in Edmonton, offers an agriculturally based theory: he says that a lack of nutrients, such as copper, in the soil could cause grain to collapse under its own weight.  Still, the most widely accepted explanation comes from Terence Meaden, director of the Circle Effects Research Group in Bradford-on-Avon, near Bath, England.  Meaden, who was once a physics professor at Dalhousie University in Halifax, says that the circles are created by "ring vortices" - electrically charged spinning balls of air that form when winds flow over hills.  According to Meaden, the vortices sometimes touch down briefly in fields, flattening the crops growing there in a circular pattern. 

   Some other experts offer more fanciful explanations.  Noyes, for one, said that whatever is behind the circles "displays an almost limitless inventiveness, an ability to design and redesign."  He added: "What the hell it is, what degree of intelligence it exhibits, I wouldn't know." 

   But whatever their cause, the circles have a strong effect on some of the people who see them.  Last summer, Darrell Roth spotted circles in a neighbor's wheat field near Christopher Lake, 50 km north of Prince Albert, Sask.  Roth, the editor and publisher of the Lake-scapes Weekly, a tourist newspaper, said that one circle was between 60 and 70 feet in diameter and that the wheat inside it was completely flattened.  Around it was a four-to-five-foot-wide band of wheat that was still standing and, beyond that, another two- to three-foot-wide circle in which the wheat had collapsed.  Roth said that about 300 yards away, there was a smaller set of circles.  "It makes you feel a little bit small," said Roth.  "You can't help but think 'Who the heck are we?' when you see something like what I saw." 

   Even pranksters are considered a possible cause of the circles.  Says Gordon Kijek, director of an Edmonton-based group that studies reports of unidentified flying objects: "We could end up tomorrow with a group stepping forward and saying, 'We did it, and here's how we did it.' "  After the two crop circles were discovered near Lethbridge last week, Kijek collected grain and soil samples from one site and sent them to a provincial laboratory in Edmonton for testing.  Still, he says that he suspects some form of intelligent being was involved.  "It's so precise and so neat and so unreal," Kijek added.  "It doesn't look like a random act of nature."  But the search for the real answers about the mystery so far has taken a circular route. 

    </I

  A GLIMPSE OF HEAVEN: the sun's corona blazed in a darkened sky 

   It was an event so rare in nature that some scientists and curious laymen travelled thousands of miles to points along Mexico's Baja peninsula to watch.  Others viewed last week's eclipse of the sun in Hawaii after arriving by aircraft or aboard luxury cruise ships.  Altogether, millions of people, including at least 200,000 visitors from scores of countries, watched from Hawaii to Brazil as the longest and most spectacular solar eclipse of the century briefly plunged some parts of the world into darkness on July 11.  "It was so incredibly eerie and spectacular," said Michael Watson, a Toronto lawyer and amateur astronomer who led 155 members of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada to Baja for the eclipse.  "I have never seen anything like it." 

   During a period in which the eclipse was visible in the best viewing locations for a maximum of six minutes and 54 seconds, the moon passed between the Earth and the sun, causing the shadow of the moon to blot out the sun's light.  In an area stretching from Hawaii through Baja and over mainland Mexico, south through Latin America and Brazil, darkness descended.  In some areas on the path of the eclipse, birds grew silent and animals acted as though night had fallen.  It was the longest total eclipse of the sun since 1973; there will not be another to equal it until the year 2132.  In most parts of the United States and Canada, the event that some enthusiasts called "the eclipse of the millennium" was seen as partial: typically, in the cloudy sky over Vancouver, only 15 per cent of the sun was obscured. 

   Working from one of the locations where the eclipse could be seen most completely, scientists at Hawaii's Mauna Kea observatory trained seven telescopes and dozens of cameras on the sun in the hope of gathering scientific data that may answer fundamental questions about the sun's chemistry.  Said David Naylor, a professor of physics at Alberta's University of Lethbridge and one of two Canadian scientists who saw the eclipse from Mauna Kea: "It was an absolute miracle that the path of the eclipse passed right overhead of the best observing site on Earth."  For those standing directly beneath the umbra, or dark inner part, of the moon's shadow, the sun's corona, or outer atmosphere, blazed in a darkened sky.  Added Naylor: "This is a once-in-three-lifetimes phenomenon."  But in the end, scientists said, the less-than-perfect weather conditions somewhat obscured the eclipse. 

   Scientists said that few events in nature surpass the eerie effect of a total solar eclipse.  About once every 16 months, the moon briefly passes between the sun and the Earth, blocking the sun's rays.  But such eclipses last only seconds and are visible only on some parts of the Earth's surface.  What made last week's eclipse uncommon was that the moon was exceptionally close to the Earth and the Earth was at its farthest annual point from the sun.  As a result, the eclipse was visible for an unusually long time. 

   Solar eclipses have inspired awe and terror since the dawn of civilization.  Indeed, the word eclipse is derived from the Greek word for abandonment, reflecting an ancient fear that the sun might abandon Earth.  As far back as 2000 BC, Babylonian astronomers discovered how to predict accurately when the moon would obscure the sun.  Historical records show that an eclipse of the sun in 585 BC inspired such fear among warring Medes and Lydians in what is now Turkey that they agreed to make peace. 

   Over the centuries, observations of solar eclipses have produced important scientific results.  During an eclipse in 1868, the English scientist Norman Lockyer discovered the element helium, which makes up a large part of the sun's burning mass of gases.  Starting in 1919, scientists began measuring starlight patterns during solar eclipses in an effort to prove Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.  More generally, the blockage of intense solar light during an eclipse allows scientists to measure the size, activity and composition of the star that sustains life on Earth.  Said Naylor: "We have basically just a few seconds to get an enormous amount of information." 

   Astronomers said that data gathered during the latest eclipse may confirm suspicions about the changing diameter of the sun, which is believed to be 4.5 billion years old and slowly diminishing.  For their part, American and Mexican scientists launched a small rocket 50 miles into the atmosphere during the eclipse from Santiago Ixcuintla, about 200 km north of Guadalajara along the Pacific coast.  Although the $184,000 mission was supposed to record information about solar particles, it failed because of technical difficulties. 

   Most of those gathered for the century's most spectacular celestial event said that they were awestruck by the eclipse.  Said Andrea Hansen, a Toronto screenwriter who saw the eclipse in Baja California, Mexico: "It makes you feel a part of the universe."  Added Watson, who saw his first eclipse from Quebec's Gaspe Peninsula in 1972: "You really get hooked by these astronomical events."  Clearly, for addicts, last week's celestial fix was truly a glimpse of heaven.  </I

   POTENT PARTICLES: a Canadian scientist makes a key discovery 

   In the fall of 1984, John Simpson, a professor of physics at Ontario's University of Guelph, carried out an experiment that produced results that could be crucial to scientists' understanding of the universe - and its ultimate destiny.  Simpson was trying to measure the mass of elementary particles called electron neutrinos, which are emitted from atoms during radioactive decay.  In December of that year, Simpson made a discovery that many other scientists said was probably erroneous: he found that some neutrinos had a much higher mass than scientists had previously believed possible.  But last November, scientists at a laboratory in Berkeley, Calif., disclosed that they had duplicated Simpson's results.  Some physicists said that, as a result, theorists now may face the prospect of having to rethink some widely held theories about the creation and composition of the universe.  Said Gerald Roy, a nuclear physicist at the University of Alberta in Edmonton: "If the theory is correct, it will turn a lot of things upside-down in the physics world." 

   Simpson said that what he discovered in 1984 and in follow-up experiments were neutrinos with two different masses, including some with masses of 17 kiloelectronvolts (the mass of subatomic matter is quoted in units of energy).  Scientists previously said that neutrinos have little or no mass.  Simpson made his discovery with the help of a particle accelerator, a device that shoots atomic particles at one-tenth the speed of light, at McMaster University in Hamilton.  But after Simpson published his findings in the New York City-based journal Physical Review Letters in April, 1985, scientists in Canada, the United States and Europe were unable to duplicate his findings in experiments of their own.  As well, Simpson, a 51-year-old native of North Bay, Ont., who won a scholarship in 1962 to England's Oxford University, where he earned a PhD in physics, said that there was widespread skepticism about his discovery because it caused "some problems with physics as we know it."  He added, "People were not ashamed to tell me they did not believe it." 

   Now, the experimental findings reported by scientists at the U.S. department of energy's Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley could change that.  Eric Norman, a nuclear physicist at that lab, disclosed at a physics conference held in Czechoslovakia in November that experiments carried out in the Berkeley laboratory appeared to confirm Simpson's discovery.  Norman told Maclean's that he subsequently submitted a paper on his findings to Physical Review Letters, and editors at the Review said that Norman's paper was being considered for publication early in 1991. 

   The confirmation of Simpson's discovery could lead to a major revision of accepted theories about the nature, and eventual fate, of the universe.  According to a body of scientific thought known as the big bang theory, the universe was created in a cosmic explosion about 15 billion years ago.  Supporters of the big bang theory say that, ever since, all the matter in the universe, including stars and planets, has been moving away from the starting point and will continue to do so throughout eternity.  But adherents of a rival theory contend that the expanding universe may reach a point at which, if the total mass of the universe is great enough, it will slow down, stop and then begin contracting again towards the centre.  If that happens, some theorists say, the densely compacted mass at the centre of the universe will eventually heat up and destroy itself by exploding again - and set a new universe in motion. 

   Until recently, most physicists calculated that the total mass of the universe was not sufficient to cause it to stop expanding.  But those calculations were based on the belief that neutrinos have virtually no mass.  Although Simpson's findings would only apply to about one-third of all neutrinos, Roy said that if heavy neutrinos exist, then previous calculations would mean that the effect of gravity on them would eventually cause the universe to contract.  The discovery of the heavy neutrinos, said Clifford Hargrove, a physicist at the Ottawa-based Centre for Research in Particle Physics, "challenges the underpinnings of physics regarding the building blocks of matter." 

   Roy added that if Simpson's findings are widely verified, he could be in line for the Nobel Prize in physics, which is awarded annually to scientists who achieve major breakthroughs.  Simpson's discoveries, said Roy, "are that important."  For his part, Norman said that when he began his experiments in California two years ago, he was skeptical about the possibility of heavy neutrinos.  But he added that the result of his laboratory work turned out to be "the most exciting thing I have ever been involved with." 

   Simpson told Maclean's that he had arranged for a leave from his teaching post for the 1990-1991 school year to work on the planned $61-million neutrino observatory under construction more than a mile underground in a mine shaft near Sudbury, Ont.  There, according to Simpson and other scientists, by studying neutrinos that penetrate the Earth's crust from outer space, they may be able to learn more about the tiny particles and the role they play in the unfolding of the universe.  Despite the Sudbury commitment, Simpson said that he would continue to work on his neutrino mass experiments in an effort to confirm the existence of heavy neutrinos.  If he succeeds, excitement over Simpson's discovery would almost certainly be tempered by the questions they raise about the creation, and the future, of the universe.  </I

   BREAKING THE CODE: The world examines the mystery of genes 

   The quest is for the Holy Grail of modern science - a multibillion-dollar international crusade to map in meticulous detail the hundreds of thousands of bits of information that make up the human genetic code, or genome.  Scientists say that the information they hope to discover will offer clues to the causes - and possible cures - of more than 4,000 inherited diseases, as well as many others with suspected genetic links, including heart disease, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.  Others predict that the 15-year project will ultimately allow people to know, and perhaps change, their genetic makeup - or the genes of unborn children.  The project has prompted debate in some medical circles over the ethical implications.  Indeed, some scientists say that the growing fund of genetic knowledge could lead to human rights infringements if people are rejected for jobs or insurance policies because of flaws in their genetic makeup.  At the same time, some Canadian scientists say that bureaucratic wrangling has helped to stall efforts to secure funding for a Canadian role in the massive project. 

   Expected to cost up to $4 billion over the next 15 years, the U.S. Genome Project, launched in 1989, has grown into an international effort involving the work of an estimated 3,000 scientists in the United States, Europe, the Soviet Union and Japan.  Now, Canadian scientists say that they will need up to $150 million to fund a Canadian contribution to the genome map during the next 15 years.  </I

    The gathering of eagles  
  by Bruce Obee 
  "SOON DOZENS, THEN HUNDREDS, APPEAR, AND THE BIG COTTONWOODS SAG UNDER THE WEIGHT OF SO MANY BIRDS" 

   Brackendale is asleep as the eagles gather on the Squamish.  One by one, in pairs and threes, they come down from their night roosts to the river.  Soon dozens, then hundreds, appear, and the big cottonwoods sag under the weight of so many birds.  In the dreary, winter-grey drizzle, a treetop candelabrum of feathered ivory heads is silhouetted against the granite walls of the Tantalus Range. 

   The air is rank with rotting salmon.  Sunrise softens an overcast sky as the eagles move onto the carcasses.  The hungry birds are alone in this hour after dawn, scant respite from the joggers and dogs, paddlers and tourists that soon will disrupt their feeding. 

   For as long as the salmon have come home to spawn, the bald eagles have followed the autumn fish runs to the coastal rivers of British Columbia.  The Bella Coola, Harrison, Dean, Qualicum, Cowichan, and many more.  Day after day, each bird devours nearly a tenth of its own body weight in fish - as much as half a kilo.  In a bountiful year, when 250,000 chum return to the Squamish, the eagles could consume a hundred tonnes of dead salmon.  By February, when all the fish have spawned, the feast is over: the avian carnivores again face the hardship of hunting herring, waterfowl, rabbits, and rodents. 

   The Squamish River runs down from the Coast Mountains into Howe Sound, on the northwest side of Vancouver.  It is the second-largest river, after the Fraser, bringing fresh water to the Strait of Georgia.  When chum are running in the Squamish, huge flocks of scavenging eagles congregate near the community of Brackendale, 10 kilometres upstream from Howe Sound.  The birds feed on the banks of the mainstem and tributaries - the Cheakamus, Cheekye, Mamquam, and Ashlu.  In the winter of 1994, the Squamish had the largest concentration of bald eagles on Earth - 3,769 - 274 more than the world record set in the 1980s at Alaska's Chilkat River. 

  

 

   "When you start talking about 4,000 eagles, you sometimes forget that 25 eagles is a lot," says Thor Froslev, curator of the Brackendale Art Gallery.  When Froslev organized the first Brackendale Winter Eagle Festival in 1986, some 537 were counted.  Each year, with changes in counting effort, weather, and fish runs, eagle numbers vary considerably.  In 1988 more than 2,500 were recorded; in 1991 only 737.  The tallying teams were optimistic in 1994, but on the count day no one expected a world record. 

   "That day that we had nearly 4,000 eagles, I'm running the board in the art gallery, writing down the numbers as they come in," Froslev recalls excitedly.  "In one area there were 200 eagles, then all of a sudden there were 600.  I'm going, 'hmm, that's good.'  But then there was an area where we usually count 600 eagles - there were 1,365.  I nearly fell off the chair.  It was fantastic." 

   Froslev, a 62-year-old transplanted Dane, is an outdoorsman with an entrepreneurial bent.  To him, thousands of eagles landing halfway up the highway between Vancouver and Whistler augur a tourist boon, dependent on the good health of his beloved Squamish River.  The eagles peak around Christmas when tourism is highest at Whistler ski village.  Eagle viewers are increasing, but more could be encouraged to stop over a few hours at Brackendale as they head to the slopes. 

   Eighty percent of the Squamish eagles concentrate on a nine-kilometre stretch of stream between the Cheakamus and Mamquam rivers.  Brackendale sits at the centre of this area, on the east bank where dikes provide access for wildlife watchers.  The river forms a natural boundary, separating the town and tourists from the west bank, where nobody lives. 

   The only protected place for eagles on the Squamish is a 71-hectare ecological reserve at Baynes Island, set aside to save old cottonwoods used by the eagles as daytime perches.  Local conservationists have asked the provincial government to create a 1,077-hectare eagle refuge along both sides of the river.  Alaska's Chilkat Bald Eagle Reserve, by comparison, is 20,000 hectares. 

   "We need a lot more protection on our rivers," Froslev stresses.  "We need that timber on the far side for the eagles, and to help slow the runoff.  It's no good having a river, trying to have fish in it, trying to encourage and enhance birds, unless you've got trees." 

   Recent research suggests that roosting trees could be as important as the food that attracts the eagles.  With adults weighing between three and six kilograms, they consistently choose the largest trees.  On many coastal rivers they perch during the day on the stout branches of mature cottonwoods, close to the water and fish. 

   At night the eagles roost communally, sometimes as far as five kilometres from their food.  Some night roosts are deep in old-growth coniferous forests, sheltered from winter winds, rain, snow, and people.  The same roost sites may be used year after year, yet biologists are uncertain why eagles pick particular places.  If these night roosts and daytime perches are logged, there's no guarantee the birds will simply move to another stand of trees.  They could be forced to abandon a much-needed feeding site. 

   This year more than 1,600 wintering eagles gorged themselves on spawning salmon in the Fraser Valley.  Half these birds foraged the banks of the Harrison River, a Fraser tributary that usually has the third-highest annual count on the continent.  Some 18 communal night roosts are known in the lower Fraser where logging companies are working with wildlife experts to reduce disturbance to wintering eagles.  Seasonal logging in some areas has been delayed until the eagles have left the streams.  At Carey Islands, 10 kilometres downstream from Agassiz, Scott Paper Ltd. became the first B.C. forestry firm to preserve a communal night roost for bald eagles. 

   Eagle advocates hope industrialists at Squamish, on the opposite side of Vancouver, will follow the Fraser Valley example.  The seaport of Squamish has already displaced much of the estuary with its logging, rail yards, dikes, and dredging.  Upstream, logging has begun on the west bank, where the eagles have enjoyed at least some sanctuary from the Brackendale bustle. 

  

   Other concerns are pressing.  BC Rail wants to expand its operations in the lower valley.  An American airline is pushing for scheduled service into Squamish Municipal Airport, which now takes only charter flights.  And increasing helicopter traffic at tree level along the river corridor is often scaring off feeding eagles. 

   "We've got a gem, an absolute world-class gem of a concentration of eagles up there," says Dave Dunbar of the B.C. Wildlife Branch in Surrey.  "It's an envious position to be in for a province to have something that's a world spectacle, yet a lot of people take it for granted." 

   One would hope we'd heed the warnings from earlier in this century when disdain for North American birds of prey almost caused their extinction.  Like other predators, eagles were exterminated by humans as vermin.  Even more devastating was DDT, an insidious pesticide that reduces the calcium content in eggs, causing them to break.  It was spread liberally across North American farms shortly after the Second World War.  Eagle populations were still crashing in 1970 when Canada seriously restricted the use of DDT.  In 1972 it was banned in the U.S., across Canada in 1990. 

   Dunbar now is helping assess the bald eagle's recovery.  A bird and non-game specialist, he's responsible for province-wide eagle counts, which began in 1986.  Each year on a day in mid-January, hundreds of volunteers don winter woollies and gumboots to scour riverbanks, beaches, and wetlands.  The emphasis is on the coast, where ice-free waters, abundant salmon, herring, and waterfowl entice eagles from Alaska, Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and Interior B.C. 

   This year 6,129 eagles were counted in B.C.  The province's total mid-winter population is estimated at 20,000 to 30,000 eagles, about one-third more than in all of the lower 48 states.  With an Alaskan population of 30,000 to 40,000 wintering eagles, the heraldic American national emblem has only this year been downgraded from an endangered to a threatened species in the U.S. 

   With a guesstimated nesting population of 9,000 adults, B.C.'s bald eagles are far from endangered.  But their day-to-day life is nonetheless fraught with hazards, particularly on the urbanized south coast.  Nanaimo veterinarian Ken Langelier examined 490 dead, injured, or ailing bald eagles between 1988 and 1994.  He discovered that one of the most frequent killers - 17.6 percent - is electrocution. 

   Langelier contends that the accelerated pace of oceanfront development is the cause.  As houses go up, trees come down, depleting nesting and perching sites.  Utility poles servicing new subdivisions are an eagle's next best choice.  A skilful fisher, a bald eagle may saturate its wings with salt water as it swoops down to pluck a fish from the sea.  When it perches atop a power pole and spreads its wings a full two metres to dry, it may touch two wires, electrocuting itself as it shorts out the neighbourhood.  Langelier, who has submitted a report to BC Hydro, suggests that wires be strung farther apart and eagle perches be placed above the lines. 

   Another common killer is poisoning - 11.4 percent in Langelier's study.  When they eat tainted prey, eagles ingest carbofurans, barbiturates, mercury, and dioxins. 

   One of the most agonizing toxins is lead.  During the autumn hunting season, eagles often swallow lead shot when feeding on dead or dying waterfowl.  "Lead poisoning is a real insult to the bird's whole physiology," Langelier explains. "It affects the blood vessels, especially in the heart, so they actually develop tiny infarcts, or blockages, like little heart attacks.  Some bald eagles with lead poisoning simply starve to death because they can't breathe, hear, or see, or don't have the physical stamina to capture food.  Or they can be so acutely poisoned that they go into convulsions and die." 

   Thanks to Langelier's vociferous persistence, the government banned hunters across B.C. this year from using lead shot to shoot waterfowl.  "A lot of people feel that eagles are extremely abundant here and there's no need to worry," observes Dave Dunbar.  "I just feel that would be a dangerous attitude toward a species that is highly vulnerable." 

   Ironically, promoting respect for wild eagles also poses a threat.  Squamish eagle viewers "are having a profound impact on the birds' ability to forage there," Dunbar warns.  The eagles are most active in the morning, but early-rising birdwatchers often frighten feeding eagles up into the trees. 

   At Victoria's Goldstream Provincial Park, a "quiet zone" allows the eagles to feed in peace.  In the early 1990s, an average of five dozen foraged the lower reaches of the Goldstream River, where access was restricted.  When the quiet zone was expanded this year to encompass the entire estuary, the number of eagles jumped to 90. 

 

   Park naturalist Carol Berryman has witnessed the effect people have on foraging eagles.  On one winter morning the tide was low and the salmon carcasses were exposed, yet there were no eagles on the flats.  Berryman then noticed two people walking on the estuary.  She chased them off and several eagles immediately came down to feed. 

   "People are really good about not going out there when you explain why," says Berryman.  A video camera and monitor now are set up in a nature house above the estuary to provide a televised view of the birds.  Those who want a closer look can bring high-powered spotting scopes.  "They see many, many more eagles: they just can't get close." 

   Hikers, cyclists, kayakers, and river rafters on the Squamish may face similar restrictions, says Dunbar.  "We could just merrily go on promoting wildlife viewing for eagles and kill the very thing that we're trying to promote ....  We've got just a little golden egg here in British Columbia.  Truly, the province is blessed with a special thing and we've got to make sure we can hang onto it.  We should promote it in a way that doesn't harm the birds."  </I

    BURNS BOG  
  by Bill Burns 
  TEN TIMES THE SIZE OF STANLEY PARK, VANCOUVER'S UNKNOWN WILDERNESS JEWEL IS BEING EATEN AWAY BY DEVELOPMENT AND GARBAGE 

   After hours of hiking through waist-high Labrador tea and salad, I'm beginning to appreciate the enormous size of Burns Bog.  We enter a grove tea of stunted trees, and my guide, Don DeMille, points out mature pines, the tallest barely two metres high.  "Like the bonsai forest?" he grins.  I'm more concerned with the ground, quivering beneath me like a giant waterbed.  "The lagoons aren't far," DeMille says, striding ahead.  Lagoons in a bog?  So much has surprised me on this hiker: I shrug and follow him. 

   Barely out of the "magic forest," I stop, stunned by the wild beauty ahead.  A series of lagoons, bright yellow with blooming water lilies.  Brown and red sphagnum moss carpets the sides of the lagoons.  Two hawks shriek overhead as they spiral upward, their broad tails glowing red.  The soporific scent of Labrador tea float in the air. 

   Like many residents of British Columbia's Lower Mainland, I'd always associated Burns Bog with the Greater Vancouver Regional District's massive garbage dump.  The huge landfill, in Delta, south of the City of Vancouver, takes in part of the bog. 

   I realize now that this is hardly a dump: it's a wilderness in the midst of a metropolis, between the Fraser River and Boundary Bay.  A staggering 4,000 hectares, Burns Bog is 10 times the size of Vancouver's Stanley Park.  </I
  BRAVE NEW WORLD: astronomers may have detected a new planet 

   By most estimates, the neutron star, or pulsar, known as PSR1829-10 may not be much to look at.  In fact, it cannot be seen at all.  Scientists say that the star, located near the centre of the Milky Way, is a dense, dark orb.  It is about 30,000 light years from Earth (light travels through space at 5.878 trillion miles per year) and was formed by a supernova explosion, the spectacular celestial event that occurs when the molten core of a star implodes, sending shock waves right through the universe.  The pulsar, which emits radio waves at regular intervals, was one of 40 such stars discovered in 1985 by scientists at the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories at Jodrell Bank, 30 km south of Manchester, in northern England.  Astronomers using Nuffield's giant radio telescope found that sound pulses emitted by 39 of the neutron stars were unwavering.  But the fluctuating responses from the 40th pulsar led them to a startling conclusion.  In a letter published last week by the British journal Nature, they speculated that the 40th pulsar was being pulled out of its orbit by an orbiting planet.  If that explanation survives the critical scrutiny of the scientific community, the planet will be the first to be detected outside of Earth's Solar System. 

   Scientists have long predicted that other planetary systems must exist and would eventually be found somewhere in the universe.  But despite some claims in the past, scientists have never been able to provide conclusive evidence to justify that theory.  They said that the apparent discovery of another planetary system would have important implications for astronomers' understanding of the universe, and could point the way towards the discovery of other planetary systems.  Said Paul Delaney, a professor of astronomy at Toronto's York University: "Until now, we only knew for sure about one planetary system around one star - the Sun.  This changes everything." 

   The evidence indicating that PSR1829-10 probably has at least one orbiting planet was assembled by three Jodrell Bank astronomers, Andrew Lyne, Matthew Bailes and Setnam Shemar.  Lyne told Maclean's that after the observatory identified the new pulsars six years ago, the lab monitored each of the neutron stars on a regular basis using its 250-foot-diameter Lovell telescope that receives radio waves.  Neutron stars cannot be seen with an optical telescope because their light cannot travel far from the galactic centre.  But he said that he and his colleagues had noticed during routine observations with the giant telescope that PSR1829-10 emitted an irregular pattern of pulses.  Lyne said that after they detected that pattern, he and Bailes, an Australian who began working at the Nuffield Laboratories only 18 months ago, tested their observations against established mathematical models in an attempt to explain the fluctuations.  Lyne said that it was not until last May that it occurred to them that they might have discovered a planet.  Said Lyne: "It was a purely serendipitous discovery." 

   The Jodrell Bank astronomers said that although the pulsar usually gave off a regular pattern of pulses, they observed that at times the pulses would slow by one one-hundredth of a second.  Then, three months later, the pulses would speed up again.  After recording several cycles, Lyne said, the astronomers concluded that the pulsar was "being tugged a bit" by a planet with an almost circular, six-month orbit.  "The most natural interpretation of this pulse variation is that the star has a companion orbiting around it," Lyne said. 

   The discovery of another planetary system, which has yet to be confirmed by other astronomers, came after years of fruitless effort by astronomers around the world.  During the past decade, scientists have been able to look ever deeper into space with the aid of sophisticated new telescopes capable of producing high-resolution images of celestial bodies.  Still, Delaney said that while these tools have come tantalizingly close to finding other planetary systems, none has provided enough evidence to satisfy the scientific community.  He said that the powerful telescopes could not overcome the blinding glare that obscures the view of objects surrounding bright, relatively young stars, including the Sun.  Because the Jodrell Bank telescope responds to radio waves coming from distant objects in space, rather than light, glare does not affect it. 

   Excitement among scientists over the possible detection of another planetary system was tempered by disappointment that it is too far away to be seen - and by the fact that the planet is unlikely to support any form of life.  Lyne said that the planet orbiting the pulsar probably has a mass of about 12 times that of Earth, and a circumference that may be two to three times that of Earth's.  The inspected planet apparently orbits its pulsar sun at a distance of about 67.24 million miles, roughly equal to the distance between the Sun and the planet Venus.  Astronomers also speculated that the planet is under constant bombardment by high levels of deadly radiation from its host neutron star.  Said Gerald Quinlan, a research associate at the Toronto-based Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics: "It is highly unlikely that any life form could survive in that environment." 

   Although other scientists will almost certainly challenge the Nuffield team's report to see if the interpretation bears scrutiny, some astronomers said that the evidence provided by Bailes, Lyne and Shemar appears convincing.  "It is the strongest piece of substantive evidence that our Solar System is not unique," Delaney said.  For his part, Gordon Walker, a professor of astronomy at the University of British Columbia, said that the use of a radio telescope in the Nuffield experiments was similar to being caught speeding by a policeman's radar gun.  "It is very hard to argue with him when that number appears on the screen," Walker said.  Still, Lyne said that it was too early to regard his team's findings as conclusive.  "I think that the observations are secure," he said.  "But there may just be something else going on with that pulsar." 

   If the Nuffield results are verified, the discovery will confront astronomers with new questions.  Walker said that the presence of the planet next to a pulsar challenges the commonly held belief that a star's planetary system would be wiped out by the catastrophic explosion of a supernova, which creates a pulsar.  And even if it did survive, many astronomers say that the explosion should have knocked the planet out of its almost perfectly circular orbit.  But Walker said that it was possible that the planet could have been formed by the debris from the host star's supernova, which occurred about one million years ago.  Said Walker: "That is not much time to allow a planet to form out of the debris." 

   As scientists studied the Nuffield findings, Lyne, Shemar and Bailes said that they planned to do new experiments.  Lyne said that there is some evidence suggesting that PSR1829-10 may have more than one planet.  But he added that it could take up to 10 years to determine whether there are other planets.  "It's an exciting concept that our Solar System is not unique," he said.  "It gives us another step forward in projecting our imaginations into outer space."  Clearly, if the theory advanced by Lyne and his colleagues is correct, many more astronomical horizons remain to be crossed. 

  THE MILKY WAY 

   Planet X is an orbiting object that astronomers say they have located near a distant pulsar, or neutron star.  It may be the first planet to be located outside of Earth's Solar System.  The pulsar, which is about 30,000 light years from the solar system of which Earth is a part, is located near the centre of the Milky Way.  Planet X apparently orbits at about the same distance from the pulsar as the planet Venus does from the Sun.  Unlike planets in Earth's Solar System, Planet X is much larger than its sun.  The dense pulsar rotates at speeds of up to 1,000 revolutions per second. 

    </I

   THE BIG PICTURE: NASA plans satellites to track the climate 

   As experts increasingly recognize the worldwide nature of pollution and other environmental hazards, many scientists say that they have become convinced that the problem must be studied on a global basis.  As a result, the Washington-based National Aeronautics and Space Administration is currently developing six 15-ton satellites, which would be the largest unmanned spacecraft ever launched by the United States, in order to study climate patterns and environmental change from space.  Called the Earth Observing System (EOS), the 15-year project, estimated to cost $35 billion, will gather data continuously on such diverse phenomena as polar ice, tropical storms and atmospheric pollutants, beginning in 1998.  Scientists say that they hope the data will lead to important new discoveries about subjects ranging from tropical rain-forest destruction to Prairie wheat yields.  Said James Drummond, a University of Toronto physicist who is designing an instrument for the project: "We need an integrated set of measurements to understand the continuity of climate change." 

   The elaborate EOS satellites will collect enough information on the Earth's environment every day to fill the memories of 50,000 personal computers.  Advocates of the project also maintain that the data will vastly improve the accuracy of assessing environmental problems, leading to possible scientific solutions.  Since NASA proposed the project in 1988, hundreds of scientists from more than 15 countries, including Canada, have begun designing equipment that may eventually be used on the satellites.  Said Gordon McBean, a University of British Columbia climatologist who is regarded as a world authority on climate change: "We need a massive global experiment like EOS to deal with the Earth as a system." 

   But other scientists claim that megaprojects like EOS consume too much research money and talent.  Andrew Lacis, a New York City-based climatologist with the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said that an entire scientific discipline can suffer when a megaproject fails to perform according to expectations.  He noted that NASA's $1.85-billion Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April, will take three more years to achieve its design potential because the main mirror has failed to focus accurately the light that strikes it from outer space.  Said Lacis: "Megaprojects have a way of slipping and being delayed and going wrong." 

   So far, the scientific community has supported NASA's proposal to have EOS in operation in eight years.  If that happens, there will eventually be two satellites always in north-south orbit around the Earth at an altitude of nearly 440 miles.  Each spacecraft will pass near the poles once a day, and some of its instruments will gather data across a 700-mile-wide swath of the Earth's surface.  The first satellite will probably monitor changes in vegetation, ice cover and precipitation, while the second, scheduled for launching before the year 2000, would measure such natural phenomena as continental drift, atmospheric ozone levels, wind speeds and temperatures. 

   Canadian scientists have eagerly joined the competition to design equipment that could be used on board the satellites or as ground-based support.  The U of T's Drummond is developing an instrument to measure carbon monoxide and methane, two atmospheric gases that may be important factors in climate change.  Drummond said that the instrument is among 20 being designed for use on the first satellite.  He added that NASA plans to select 12 to 16 devices by the end of this month.  Meanwhile, the Ottawa-based Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, a branch of Energy, Mines and Resources, is leading several global-change studies that incorporate and interpret the data collected from EOS.  Said Barry Goodison, co-ordinator of space programs at Environment Canada's Canadian Climate Centre, and one of 35 Canadian scientists involved in the studies: "We see this as an opportunity to push Canada into more Earth observation research." 

   Many scientists say that EOS could lead to international action on global pollution.  Ellsworth LeDrew, a University of Waterloo, Ont., geography professor who is involved in the Canada Climate Centre's studies, said that scientists must provide a clearer understanding of the extent and causes of environmental damage before governments can be expected to take co-ordinated action.  
  

          Reduction of wasp (Hymenoptera: Vespidae)
populations by poison-baiting&semi; experimental use of sodium
monofluoroacetate (1080) in canned sardine      
        Abstract       Poison-baiting
trials were carried out in Canterbury, Nelson, and Westland in
1986/87 to 1989/90 to reduce wasp (predominantly   Vespula
vulgaris  ) populations.   Compound 1080 was mixed with canned
sardine in aspic jelly for bait.   Bait stations were put out in
areas of 1.5-3 ha, at a density of about 40/ha.   Wasps were
pre-fed with non-toxic bait for at least 3 days before
poisoning.  
    Poison-baits containing 0.001% and 0.01% 1080 had no
significant effect on wasp traffic at nest entrances, 0.1% 1080
reduced wasp traffic by 17%, 0.5% 1080 by 78%, and 1% 1080 by 89%.
  Reduction in wasp numbers after poisoning with 0.5% or 1% 1080
was rapid, up to 100% within 6 h.   The level of reduction
declined beyond 100 m from bait stations.   After poisoning, wasp
traffic at nests within 100 m of bait stations remained low for the
rest of the season, but partially recovered at nests more than 100
m from baits.   Wasp numbers visiting bait stations containing
non-toxic baits increased to about 30% of pre-poison levels 4 weeks
after poisoning.   These wasps must have come from nests more
than 100 m from bait stations.  
    Although 1080 in sardine baits effectively reduced wasp
populations in local areas, a concentration of 0.5-1.0% was
required.   The hazard to non-target species was reduced by the
bait being confined in bait stations and exposed for less than 6 h.
  However, 1080 is highly toxic to vertebrates, especially dogs,
which imposes restrictions on its use.   Alternative poisons that
are less toxic than 1080 to non-target species need to be
found.  
        INTRODUCTION      
    Two species of introduced wasps, the common wasp
(  Vespula vulgaris  ) and the German wasp (  V.
germanica  ) (Hymenoptera: Vespidae) cause problems in forestry,
beekeeping, horticulture, and tourism/recreation industries in New
Zealand because of their great numbers, scavenging habit, and
painful (rarely fatal) sting (Thomas 1960&semi; Perrott 1975&semi; Walton &amp;
Reid 1976&semi; Donovan 1985&semi; Moller et al. 1987&semi; Clapperton et al.
1989).   Problems are worst in February and March when wasp
numbers are highest.   Wasps may also be upsetting the ecological
balance of forests by predation on native insects and by
competition for food with insects and birds (Moller et al. 1987).
  There are even reports of wasps killing nestling birds (Moller
1990&semi; Read et al. 1990).  
    Wasp numbers can be reduced by destroying colonies in nests
using petrol or contact insecticides such as actellic dust or
carbaryl.   However, nests are not easy to find.   Wasp numbers
can also be reduced by laying poison-bait (Wagner &amp; Reierson 1969).
  Foraging worker wasps collect the poison-bait and carry it to
their nests, where they feed it to the larvae, queen, and other
workers.  
    Poison-baits for wasps consist usually of an insecticide
mixed with fish or meat.   Sugar-based baits are unsuitable
because they are attractive to honey bees (  Apis
mellifera  ).   Various organochlorine, organophosphate, and
carbamate insecticides mixed with fish or meat baits have been
tested on   V. vulgaris   and a related species of wasp
(  V. pensylvanica  ) in the U.S.A. (Grant et al. 1968&semi;
Wagner &amp; Reierson 1969).   Two organochlorines, mirex and
chlordane, gave effective control of wasps over areas of up to 40
ha.   Because the use of organochlorine insecticides became
restricted, Ennik (1973) investigated the use of encapsulated
diazinon and "Rabon" (both organophosphates).   Both reduced wasp
numbers by 75-95% after 2 days.   Chang (1988) also achieved
effective control of wasps using encapsulated diazinon.  
    Mirex, the only insecticide that has been scientifically
evaluated for use in poison-baits for wasp control in New Zealand,
substantially reduced wasp numbers in a resort area in the
Marlborough Sounds (Perrott 1975).   However, poison-baiting with
mirex has not always been successful (Walton &amp; Reid 1976, various
personal communications).   Mirex is not registered as a
pesticide in this country, and it has now been banned in the USA.
  A replacement has not yet been found.  
    Compound 1080 (sodium monofluoroacetate) is not commonly
regarded as an insecticide but has been used experimentally as such
overseas&semi; e.g., David (1950) found that 0.001% 1080 applied to
plants killed aphids.   It was first used experimentally as a
wasp poison in New Zealand in 1980 (unknown concentration in raw
minced beef, C. Eves, pers. comm.), apparently with good
results.  
    This paper reports results of research requested by the
former New Zealand Forest Service and the Department of
Conservation to substantiate the effectiveness of 1080 and to
provide information for its registration with the Pesticides Board
as an insecticide in baits for wasp control.  
        STUDY AREAS      
    Most of the research was done from 1986/87 to 1988/89 in Mt
Thomas Forest, North Canterbury, South Island, New Zealand, where
large numbers of wasps had been reported in picnic areas and along
forest tracks.   The forest is partly planted with introduced
conifers (  Pinus radiata   and   Pseudotsuga
menziesii  ), but also contains extensive areas of mountain
beech (  Nothofagus solandri   var.
  cliffortioides  ).   The beech trees are heavily infested
with the scale insect,   Ultracoelostoma assimile  , which
produces honeydew, used by wasps and some of their prey as a food
resource.   Most wasp nests were found in the ground at the edge
of the beech forest, and most (97%) belonged to   V.
vulgaris  .   In places, there were as many as 75 wasp
nests/ha.  
    In 1989/90, field trials were extended, with the assistance
of the Department of Conservation and the Ministry of Forestry, to
other northern South Island beech forests, where the predominant
wasp species was also   V. vulgaris  .  
        METHODS      
        Bait preparation      
    On the basis of preliminary bait-preference tests (E. B.
Spurr, unpubl. data), canned sardine cat-food in aspic jelly
(Wonder Cat, packed by Pataya Food Industries Ltd, Samutsakorn,
Thailand) was used for bait.  
    Poison-baits were prepared in the laboratory.   The 1080
powder (either Fike or Tenate brand) was dissolved in water, dyed
with 0.01% Acid Brilliant Green, and then mixed with the canned
sardine.   Before 1989/90, the poison-bait was frozen in 50 g
plastic pottles ready for putting in bait stations.   In 1989/90,
poison-bait was frozen in 400 g plastic tubes ready to be put in
bait stations with bait-guns.   Baits were thawed the day before
use.  
    Bait stations were made from cans or plastic bottles (50-75
mm diameter) open at one end and tied horizontally to wooden stakes
1.2 m above ground.   Initially, the open end was covered with
plastic bird netting, but because birds were not attracted to bait
stations the netting was not used in later trials.  
        Field trials      
    Areas of 1.5-3 ha in forest clearings or along tracks were
selected for poison-baiting trials.   Because most wasps travel
less than 200 m to food sources (Edwards 1980), areas were
separated by at least 500 m to reduce interference between
treatments.  
    On the basis of preliminary trials (which showed that the
greater the number of bait stations the more wasps collected bait)
bait stations were located about 10 m apart around the periphery
and on transects through areas to be treated, at a density of about
40/ha.   Where possible, bait stations were placed in sunny
locations because these attracted more wasps than those in the
shade.  
    Non-toxic baits were put out for at least 3 days before
poison-baits to attract wasps to the bait stations and to determine
when the level of bait acceptance was high enough to warrant
putting out poison-baits.   Poison-baits were put out only when
more than five wasps (on average) were feeding simultaneously from
each non-toxic bait.   Sometimes wasps had developed a feeding
frenzy for the non-toxic baits, during which more than 50 wasps
would be feeding simultaneously from a single bait.   This
generally occurred only after 2-3 days of fine weather and only
during January-April when wasp populations were greatest.  
     On the day of poisoning, 50 g poison-baits were placed in
bait stations by about 1000 h and replenished
  graph: Fig. 1    caption  
 as necessary.   Concentrations of 0.001%, 0.01%, 0.1%, and 0.5%
1080 were each used in one operation and 1% 1080 was used in 12
operations between 1986/87 and 1989/90.    
        Monitoring wasp populations      
    Wasp populations were monitored before and after poisoning
operations and compared with wasp populations in non-poison areas,
by counting:
    a.    The number of wasps in 1 min. (i.e.,
wasp traffic rate) leaving or entering nests (one count per nest
between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. NZST,   n   = 10-92
nests/operation, monitored for 4-16 weeks before and after
poisoning operations).   
    b.    The number of wasps simultaneously
present on non-toxic baits (average of three counts between 10 a.m.
and 4 p.m. NZST,   n   = 30-60 baits/operation, monitored for
3 days to 5 weeks before and after poisoning operations).   
    c.    The number of wasps simultaneously
present on poison-baits (counts at 0.5-1 h intervals until the
baits were removed after about 6 h,   n   = 30-60
baits/operation).     
    The wasp traffic rate gives an index of the wasp population
resident in the area being surveyed.   The number of wasps
counted on non-toxic baits gives an index of the total number of
wasps (residents and non-resident visitors) in the area, and the
number of wasps present on toxic baits gives a measure of the rate
of reduction in the wasp population on the day of poisoning.  
    The extent of reduction in wasp traffic was assessed from
counts made 1-2 days before and after poisoning, from the formula,
1 - after count/before count at each nest.   Data were normalised
using a   ln   (  x   + 1) transformation and tested by
analysis of variance for the effects of 1080 concentration and
distance from baits.   Least significant differences were
calculated from the formula given by Andrews et al. (1980).
  Means and upper and lower significance limits were
back-transformed for graphing.   A significance level
(&alpha;) of 0.05 was used in all calculations.  
        RESULTS      
    Poisoning operations using 0.001% and 0.01% 1080 had no
significant effect on the number of wasps leaving or entering
nests, poisoning with 0.1% 1080 reduced wasp numbers by an average
of 17%, 0.5% 1080 by 78%, and 1% 1080 by 89% (Fig. 1).   The
difference between the effect of 0.5% and 1% 1080 on wasp traffic
was significant (  F   = 35.629, df = 1,   P   &lt;
0.001).   With 1% 1080, there was no significant
difference between the reduction in wasp traffic at nests of
  V. vulgaris   (89%,   n   = 297) and   V.
germanica   (89%,   n   = 11) (  F   = 0.018, df =
1,   P  &gt; 0.05).   There were too few
  V. germanica   nests to compare with   V. vulgaris  
at other concentrations of 1080.  
    The reduction in wasp numbers after poisoning with 0.5% and
1% 1080 was rapid.   The number of wasps collecting poison-bait
decreased by 86% 2 h after poison-baits were put out (Fig. 2).
  This was a result of mortality, not avoidance of the bait,
because some baits were totally removed and had to be replenished.
  Also, at most nests within 100 m of bait stations, wasp traffic
was heavily reduced (and at some declined to zero) within 6 h of
poisoning.   Dead wasps were found on baits, on the ground, and
at nest entrances on the day of poisoning, but most were found
inside nests when they were dug up several days later.   For a
few days after poison-baiting, workers at surviving nests were seen
carrying dead larvae out of the nest.  
    Poisoning with 0.5-1% 1080 reduced wasp numbers in nests at
least 300 m away from bait stations (Fig. 3).   However, the
effect of poison-baiting declined with distance from bait stations
(  F   = 16.746, df = 5,   P   &lt;
0.001).   The average reduction 1-2 days
  graph: Fig. 2    caption  
  graph: Fig. 3    caption  
 after poisoning was 88% at nests within 100 m of baits
(  n   = 330) compared to 35% at nests 100-300 m from baits
(  n   = 56).   All wasps died in 56% of the nests within
100 m of baits, but in only 14% of the nests 100-300 m away.
  Wasp populations in less than 5% of nests within 100 m of baits
were apparently unaffected by poisoning.   These nests were all
on the boundary, not in the centre, of poison areas.   The main
flight path of wasps from these nests tended to be away from the
line of bait stations.   One such nest was only about 2 m from
one in which all wasps died.  
    After poisoning with 0.5-1% 1080, wasp numbers at nests
within 100 m of bait stations remained low for the rest of the
season, but partially recovered at nests more than 100 m away (Fig.
4).   The recovery was less at nests 100-200 m from bait stations
than at nests 200-300 m away.   The decline in wasp numbers at
nests 100-300 m from bait stations 5 weeks after putting out
poison-baits was greater than the natural seasonal decline in nests
more than 500 m from bait stations.  
    Wasp nests which survived the first few days after
poisoning died out earlier than nests in non-poison areas.   Five
weeks after poisoning, all wasps had died in 69% of nests within
100 m of baits (  n   = 79), but only in 2% of nests more
than 500 m away (  n   = 159), and 12 weeks after poisoning,
all wasps had died in 94% of nests within 100 m of baits, but only
in 6% of nests more than 500 m away.  
    As a result of poison-baiting, nests in poison areas were
significantly smaller and contained significantly fewer queen cells
than nests in non-poison areas (E. B. Spurr, unpubl. data).  
    The number of wasps visiting non-toxic baits put out in
poison areas to monitor the wasp nuisance declined by more than 95%
1 day after poison operations.   This is greater than the
reduction in the number of wasps leaving or entering nests,
probably because wasps foraging on baits are the ones most directly
affected by poisoning.   However, like the recovery in the number
of wasps at nests more than
  graph: Fig. 4    caption  
  graph: Fig. 5    caption  
 100 m from bait stations, 4 weeks after poison-baiting the number
of wasps visiting non-toxic baits had increased to about 30% of
pre-poison levels (Fig. 5).   Poisoning was equally successful
whether carried out in January, February, or March (Fig. 6).
  However, January poisoning provided the longest period of
relief from wasps.  
        DISCUSSION      
    The concentration of 1080 in baits required to kill
individual wasps is &lt; 0.001% (E. B. Spurr, unpubl.
data).   However, the concentration required to kill whole
populations of wasps in nests is considerably greater than this,
and presumably is related to the amount of poison-bait carried into
the nest per unit time.   With the present method of
poison-baiting, 1% 1080 is required to achieve an 89% reduction in
wasp populations within 100 m of bait stations.   It is doubtful
that increasing the concentration of 1080 would reduce wasp
populations further.   The reason why some wasps survived poison
operations is more likely to be insufficient bait getting into the
nest than insufficient poison in the bait.   One factor affecting
the amount of bait carried to nests may be the location of bait
stations in relation to flight paths of wasps.   Another factor
may be the limited time wasps have to collect bait before they die
(&lt;2 h with 1% 1080).  
    In these trials I attempted to increase the amount of bait
carried to nests in two ways.   First, I used a much higher
density of bait stations (40/ha) than in previously published
studies (&lt;1/ha), to increase the chances of wasps
encountering baits.   A high density of bait stations also
compensates for the difficulty of predicting the flight paths of
wasps.   Second, I pre-fed with non-toxic baits to give wasps
time to find baits,
  graphs: Fig. 6    caption  
 thereby increasing the number of wasps collecting bait, and
consequently the amount of bait collected per unit time.   The
bait station density and amount of pre-feeding required probably
depends on whether the wasp density is high or low, and whether the
poison site is a picnic area in a forest clearing or a narrow track
through forest.   The lower the wasp density and the narrower the
area the greater the density of baits and amount of pre-feeding
required.   In one trial, in an open area with a dense wasp
population, 1 poison-bait/ha reduced the wasp traffic at nests by
95% (E. B. Spurr 1990, unpubl. FRI contract report).  
    The amount of bait collected by wasps could be increased by
using a more attractive bait.   Sardine cat-food attracts more
wasps than any other bait I have tested so far.   However,
further research is needed to make baits more attractive to wasps,
particularly early in the season, perhaps by incorporating prey- or
plant-injury volatiles (e.g., Aldrich et al. 1985) or wasp
pheromones (e.g., Heath &amp; Landolt 1988).  
    The post-poison increase in number of wasps on non-toxic
baits, but not at nests within 100 m of bait stations, indicates
that wasps foraged from nests more than 100 m away.   The
proportional increase in number of wasps on baits was not as great
as that of wasp traffic at nests more than 200 m from bait
stations, indicating that most of the invading wasps came from
100-200 m away.   This indicates that poison-baits should be put
in buffer zones around areas to be protected.   The width of such
buffer zones should be related to the distance wasps will travel to
food.   Little information is available on this topic.
  Although most wasps travel less than 200 m to food sources
(Edwards 1980), they may travel further when food is scarce,
especially if a food source is available that is not being used, as
after a poison-baiting operation.   I suggest that buffer zones
should be about 200 m wide, but further experimentation is required
to verify this.  
    An alternative or maybe additional tactic to poison-baiting
in buffer zones may be a follow-up poisoning with at least some
baits in different locations to those in the first operation.
  This may kill any wasps that survived because baits were not in
their flight path.   A follow-up operation 2 weeks after the
first may also kill wasps that escaped the initial poisoning as
pupae (which are non-feeding) (Ennik 1973).  
    My trial sites were all small (&lt;3 ha),
involving &lt;120 baits, but the principles apply over
larger areas.   Some subsequent management operations have
covered more than 30 ha, involving more than 1200 baits, with
equally successful results (A.E. Newton, pers. comm.).   Other
management operations have not been successful because of
insufficient pre-feeding, too few wasps collecting bait, or wet
weather preceding and/or during the operations (E. B. Spurr 1990,
unpubl. FRI contract report).  
    Poisoning should be done as soon as wasps readily accept
bait (early January in North Canterbury).   The earlier poisoning
is done, the longer the period of relief from wasps.   However,
the timing of both nest initiation and bait acceptance indicate
that poisoning should not be done before the end of December.
  In one trial in early December, poison-baits containing 1% 1080
attracted few wasps and failed to prevent the wasp population
reaching a peak in mid February as normal (E. B. Spurr, 1990
unpubl. FRI contract report).   Better results may be possible if
a synthetic long-lasting bait was available that could be put out
early in the season and remain attractive to wasps for at least 2-3
weeks (unlike sardine, which is attractive for only 2-3 days).  
    There is no evidence that poison-baiting affects wasp
numbers in subsequent years.   Although poison-baiting results in
fewer new queens being produced because fewer nests survive, this
is compensated for by invasion of queens from outside poison areas.
  Thus, poison-baiting needs to be done annually.  
    The risk of poisoning non-target insect populations is
reduced by using a protein bait that attracts few insects other
than wasps, by exposing baits for only a short time (&lt;6 h),
and by confining them within bait stations.   This
also reduces the risk to birds.   Research is underway to
determine the hazard of dead wasps and larvae to birds and other
non-target species.   The main risk of wasp poisoning operations
is to dogs and cats, which may be attracted to the sardine bait.
  Compound 1080 is highly toxic to vertebrates (the
LD  50   of 1080 to laboratory rats is 0.2 mg/kg, whereas
that for mirex is 306 mg/kg).   Dogs are particularly susceptible
to 1080 (LD  50   0.07 mg/kg) and need to eat only a
pea-sized piece of bait to receive a lethal dose.   Such a small
amount may be dropped on the ground without being noticed by the
operator, and may remain lethal to dogs for several weeks.
  Thus, when 1080 is used in picnic sites or other public areas,
it must be used with extreme care.   It is a controlled pesticide
and can be applied only by approved operators (Pesticides Act 1979&semi;
Vertebrate Pest Control Regulations 1983).  
    Alternative insecticides exist that are less toxic than
1080 to non-target vertebrate species and are also non-repellent to
target species.   For example, hydramethylnon has been used in
baits for ant control in the USA (Davidson &amp; Stone 1989) and is
non-repellent to   V. germanica   (Reid &amp; MacDonald 1986).
  Chang (1988) considered it the most effective of the chemicals
he tested against   V. pensylvanica  .   Because of the
risks involved with using 1080, preliminary research on
hydramethylnon and other poisons for wasp control (E. B. Spurr
1989, unpubl. FRI contract report) should be continued.    
  

          Life history.       The
life cycle of   O. novaezealandiae   is univoltine:
nymphs emerge in spring and mature in summer&semi; adults mate and
produce eggs in autumn, and die off at the onset of winter.
  The majority of the population is more or less at a
similar stage at any particular time.   Egg-laying commences
in February (January according to Potts 1884, April according
to Suckling 1978) and continues through to April and May, or
as long as the females survive.   In the laboratory females
continue laying long after their sisters in the wild have died
(Suckling 1978).   Potts recorded that one female produced
five or six oothecae&semi; Suckling recorded two or more
oothecae per female and, in one instance, five.   This
number is low in comparison with that of   Stagmomantis
carolina  , for which Breland (1941b) found the average of
eight captive females to be greater than seven, with a maximum
of fourteen.  
    The earliest any first-instar nymphs have been found
in the wild is May in Auckland (Bennett 1981) and mid August
in Nelson (NN).   However, also in Nelson E.W. Valentine
(unpublished data) recorded that a few nymphs emerge in June
and July, slightly more in August, and the vast majority
during September and October, after which hatching ceases
abruptly.   Many appear during September, and some have been
found as late as January.  
    Adults are present from February onwards.   The
earliest an adult has been seen is February, but they are not
present in numbers until late February, and particularly
during March, when they are most abundant.   Their numbers
start falling off in May, and most adults have disappeared by
the beginning of June or earlier (first week of May on the
Taieri Plains, Dunedin (DN) - A.C. Harris, pers. comm.).
  That this is the result of cooler temperatures is attested
to by the fact that adults taken into the laboratory from the
wild survive and produce more oothecae for some time after
their siblings in the wild have disappeared (Suckling 1978).
  Males are the first to disappear, and a few females may
overwinter and survive even up until the following
November (Crosby 1984).   Females begin producing
oothecae during March, and continue for as long as they
survive.  
    The interval from laying to hatching is normally 5-6
months.   However, Suckling (1978) found the period to vary
from only 35 days to 53 days for laboratory-reared specimens,
and this is corroborated by Bennett (1981), who reported
nymphs emerging after 73 days from an ootheca laid in the
laboratory in June.   In general in the wild eggs laid
during April do not hatch until September at the earliest, so
development requires at least 150 days.   An exception to
this is the example of an overwintering female in Auckland
which produced an ootheca between August and October from
which the nymphs had emerged by November (Crosby 1984), a
possible maximum of some 90 days only.   Nymphs have been
reported emerging in autumn (Crosby 1984).  
    The time taken for egg development in both New
Zealand species is unusually long, but may be normal for
species living in temperate climates.  
    In France and Europe the eggs of   Mantis
religiosa   and   Ameles   sp. take approximately
nine months before hatching (Fabre 1894, Sharp 1895),
whereas in seven tropical species the period is short, varying
from 13 to 51 days, with two species having a maximum of 31
days and one 25 days (Ene 1962, 1964, Kumar 1973).   The
same is true of Indian mantids, in which one species required
20 days to develop, a   Mantis   sp. 18 days, and
  Schizocephala bicornis   30 days (Wood-Mason 1878b).
  Adair (1914a), in Egypt, found that   Miomantis
savignyi   required an average of 27.5 days (range 18-38),
  Sphodromantis bioculata   57 days (range 41-78),
  Blepharis mendica   34 days (range 30-40), and (in
1914b)   Mantis religiosa   an average of 33.75 days
(range 31-51).   Warmer temperatures accelerate development
(Ene 1964), and Faure (1940) found the average incubation for
a South African species to be 31 days in summer and 62 days in
winter.   Adair (1914b) found that   M. religiosa  
eggs took 31-33 days to develop in early autumn and 48-51 days
in early winter.     M. religiosa   thus exemplifies
this very strongly when the subtropical data from Egypt are
compared with the temperature data from the northern
limits of its distribution - nine months.   Further, since
mantids are generally tropical/subtropical insects, it is not
surprising that the time taken for egg development in species
at the northern and southern extremes of mantid occurrence is
unusually long.  
    It is probable that development of the egg of   O.
novaezealandiae   is triggered by a temperature effect
(see Zaslavski 1988), as all eggs of an ootheca usually hatch
within a day or two of each other, although the oothecae
themselves may be at different stages of development even in
the same area.   Suckling (1978) studied 150 oothecae of
  O. novaezealandiae   in Palmerston North (WI-WN)
and found that in 84 of them (56%) all the nymphs had emerged
within 24 hours of each other&semi; in another 28 (19%) all the
nymphs had emerged within 3 days of each other&semi; and in the
remaining 38 (25%) the nymphs emerged within 11 days of each
other.   E.W. Valentine (unpublished data) found that in
Nelson most oothecae had completely hatched within 3-4 days,
the majority emerging on the same day from any one ootheca.
  In a few instances the hatching period was extended to
11 or even 17 days.    
        Overwintering    .   In
general, in temperate regions, mantids pass the winter in the
egg stage (Gurney 1951).     Orthodera
novaezealandiae   is no exception to this.   However,
in suitable places - probably localities with a warm
microclimate - it is able to overwinter in the wild as nymphs
and adults, as well as in the egg, the usual overwintering
stage.   Crosby (1984) found third-instar nymphs in May,
fifth instars in late July, and sixth instars in
September-October&semi; adults developed from them in
November.   One of these, a male, was observed mating
with an overwintered female from the preceding generation
(usually only females overwinter).   There are 16
records of adult mantids being found during June (including
one from Stokes Valley (WN), two from Wellington (WN), and one
from Te Puke (BP)), one for July, five for August
(including one from Hamilton (WO)), two for September, two
for October, and two for November - all from Auckland (AK),
except as specified.   Crosby (1984) concludes that it is
likely that adults and nymphs of   O. novaezealandiae  
regularly overwinter in Auckland in low numbers, and that
this probably occurs in the wider Auckland region and in
Northland (ND) also.   Survival may be dependent on warm
daytime temperatures, as at the southern limits of the
  species'   range in New Zealand it thrives in Cromwell
(CO), where the winter daytime temperatures are warm, but not
in Dunedin or Southland (SL), where they are not.  
        Oothecae     are laid on walls,
fence posts, branches, twigs, and so on, in fact on any
reasonably flat, firm surface, but are never squeezed into
cracks or folds.   Shelter does not appear to have much
influence on the female 's choice of oviposition site.
  Suckling (1978) examined 150 oothecae from the Palmerston
North area and found that their dimensions were in the
range 4.55-8.80 mm (usually 5.50-6.60 mm) high, 4.00-7.00 mm
(usually 6.00-6.50 mm) wide, and 8.00-18.75 mm (usually
10.00-12.00 mm) long.   Except for one example from
Titirangi, Auckland which was 23.00 mm long, one example from
Point Chevalier, Auckland, which was only 7.5 mm long, and the
width dimension of 3.0 mm recorded by Ward (1969), the
dimensions of the oothecae examined during this study and
those of Ward (1969) fall within these limits.   No
malformed oothecae have been found, apart from one very small
example, almost a fragment, which probably resulted from the
mother being disturbed.  
    Oothecae (Fig. 7,39,40) are rich, dark brown with a
thin surface layer of scattered, irregular-sized vesicles,
rather like a thin, pale-coloured, dispersed, glistening foam.
  Orifices are closed by a thick, flat layer of fine,
bright, cream-coloured foam which comprises the conspicuous
stripe along the top of the ootheca.   In some instances
this may disintegrate before the nymphs emerge.   The
narrow shape is constant whatever the form of the surface on
which the ootheca is laid - the sides with vertical sloped
ribs, the commencing (posterior) end irregularly rounded, and
the terminating (anterior) end sloped like the sides.   The
orifices are arranged mid-dorsally in two rows in a
figure-of-eight configuration, and vary in number from 5 to 35
(commonly 15-25) (Suckling 1978), or from 8 to 30 (average 17)
(Ward 1969).   In the throat of each orifice a thin,
flexible, transverse valve occurs&semi; it is attached across the
posterior wall at some distance down, almost at the level of
the eggs, and completely seals off the egg chamber by passing
upwards and     fowards    forwards     so that
its border lies in close contact with the anterior wall.
  Such flaps or valves have been described or illustrated in
the oothecae of various species of mantid on a number of
occasions (Brongniart 1881, Fabre 1897, Giardina 1898, 1899,
Kershaw 1910, Rau &amp; Rau 1913, Williams &amp; Buxton 1916, Chopard
1938 (pp. 197-199), Breland &amp; Dobson 1947, Sharell 1971), and
are probably a general characteristic of mantid oothecae of
this type.   Thus, access to each egg chamber is protected
by this flap and by the plug of foam-like material filling the
mouth of the orifice.   The outer lip of each orifice is
more or less horizontal.  
    Each orifice leads into a transverse egg-chamber
containing a single row of eggs each contained in a
membranous cell.   The membrane of the cell is
glistening and adheres to the egg-chamber wall and to the
membrane of the contiguous cell.   The posterior wall of
each has a broad vertical strip of opaque pale-coloured
material adhering to its inner surface which may serve to grip
the egg.   The egg-chambers of each side are offset in
relation to each other, and each contains three eggs arranged
vertically.  
    Suckling (1978) suggested that only two eggs were
present within each egg chamber, and that there was no
relationship between the number of eggs and the number of
orifices.   He found the number of eggs in each transverse
row to vary between one and five.   Ward (1969) also found
only two eggs in each chamber.   However, in the present
study three was the usual number, and each transverse row,
comprising two offset egg chambers, therefore had six eggs.
  Thus there is a direct relationship between the number
of orifices, the number of egg chambers, and the number of
eggs.   Their arrangement is similar to that of
  Stagmomantis carolina   (Johansson) described by Rau &amp;
Rau (1913).  
    The total number of eggs per ootheca is very variable.
  Suckling (1978) found this to be as high as 70 and as low
as 5, with 20-40 most commonly present.   Ward (1969) found
the range to be 20-60, with an average of 40.   E.W.
Valentine (unpublished data) found in Nelson that the number
of nymphs emerging from an ootheca varied from 2 to 65, but
was mostly 24-45.   This number is low when compared with
that of   Miomantis caffra   (up to approx. 248) and
very low in comparison with 325 recorded for
  Sphodromantis lineola   (Burmeister) (Kumar 1973).
  It may indicate a lower mortality rate for   O.
novaezealandiae  .   Adair (1914a) reported between 54
and 102 nymphs emerging from a single ootheca of
  Miomantis savignyi  , up to 436 in   Sphodromantis
bioculata  , and between 32 and 88 in   Blepharis
mendica.    
    Although the form of the ootheca varies greatly in
different mantid species, its structure is basically similar.
  It has been described for   Mantis religiosa   by
Pagenstecher (1864), Brongniart (1881), Fabre (1897), and
Giardina (1898, 1899)&semi; in   Gongylus gongyloides   by
C.E. Williams (1904)&semi; in   Hierodula saussurii   by
Kershaw (1910)&semi; in   Stagmomantis carolina   by Rau &amp;
Rau (1913)&semi; in   Miomantis savignyi, Fischeria
baetica  , and   Sphodromantis bioculata   by
Adair (1914a, b), who also illustrates those of   Empusa
egena, Eremiaphila khamsin,   and   Mantis
religiosa  &semi; and in   Sphodromantis guttata   by
Williams &amp; Buxton (1916)&semi; as well, Shelford (1909) and
Waterhouse (1913) have described mantid oothecae.   The
ootheca illustrated by Chopard (1938, p. 202, fig. 201) is not
that of   orthodera ministralis   and is
misidentified.  
    The biochemistry of the ootheca of   Orthodera
novaezealandiae   and   O. ministralis   has been
studied by Giardina (1899), Heckman &amp; Goldberg (1960), Rudall
(1965), and Ward (1969).   In 1955 Parker &amp; Rudall described
small, rectangular crystals adhering to or embedded in the
protein membranes of which the mantis ootheca is formed.
  These crystals, each of which was embedded in a
complicated protein envelope, were identified as being calcium
citrate.   Heckman &amp; Goldberg (1960), working with oothecae
of   O. ministralis   from Australia, denied the
presence of calcium citrate crystals.   However, Rudall
(1965), working with their material and using their
techniques, considered that they had dissolved the crystals
before analysis, and went on to illustrate beautiful calcium
citrate crystals present in the body-wall gland of reared
female   O. novaezealandiae   from New Zealand.
  Identical crystals had been seen previously in
oothecae of other mantids.   Ward (1969) found that the
ootheca material was not chitin, probably contained protein,
and contained approximately 0.1% calcium.  
    The process of the formation of the ootheca in
  Orthodera novaezealandiae   has been illustrated or
described by Bandsma &amp; Brandt (1963), Sharell (1971), and
Castle (1988), and a detailed account of its production and of
oviposition is given by Ward (1969).   It is similar to that
described by Pagenstecher (1864), Perrier (1870), Brongniart
(1881), Fabre (1898), Giardina (1899), and Przibram (1907) for
  Mantis religiosa,   by C.E. Williams (1904) for
  Gongylus gongyloides,   by Kershaw (1910) for
  Hierodula saussurii,   by Rau &amp; Rau (1913) for
  Stagmomantis carolina  , by Adair (1914a, b) for
  Miomantis savignyi   and   Fischeria
baetica  , and by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916) for
  Sphodromantis guttata  .   The ootheca is formed
from a substance secreted by large abdominal glands which
hardens on exposure to the air.   It is vacuolated and
beaten into a froth by movements of the ovipositor blades.
  Regular cycles of abdominal movement occur as one group of
eggs is deposited on one side and then another on the other.
  The method of formation of the orifice rim of flaps and
the internal valve is obscure.   The wings play no part in
the process and the cerci monitor the surface being
produced.  
        Eggs     (Fig.41,42).   Each
egg, densely packed with yolk and with a soft, smooth,
glistening chorion, is 4.5 mm long by 1.25 mm wide when freed
from the ootheca and taking its natural form.   It is
subcylindrical to cigar-shaped, with the ventral surface
almost straight, the dorsal curved, and each end rounded, with
the anterior end slightly the narrower.The exochorion is
smooth, structureless, and slightly thicker at the anterior
pole&semi; the endochorion is densely and finely granular, the
granules appearing as rods in sectional view.   The granules
are refractive, vary in size and shape, and are uniformly
distributed over the whole egg.   Numerous small, clear
patches are distributed amongst the granules, especially
on the dorsal surface, where the granules are larger and
stronger.   In the mid-dorsal equatorial area a series of
unidirectional, strongly refractive, dart-shaped structures
occurs, each with longitudinal banding and pointed
posteriorly.   These are internal, and do not project above
the surface.   Other curved, rod-like structures shaped like
nail clippings occur posterior to these.  
    After the nymphs have hatched the chorion becomes
opaque and the darts are more conspicuous, appearing
dark-coloured when viewed from certain angles.   Their
distribution ceases within a conspicuous mid-dorsal
differentiation which is large (approx. 0.25 mm),
circular, and brown in colour.   It is a smooth, slightly
elevated dome with a strong, central, cup-shaped crater - the
micropyle - in which there are irregular, clear, refractive
patches.  
    Beier (1968) described and illustrated the egg of
  Hierodula crassa  , which is quite different from
that of   Orthodera novaezealandiae   in being more
complex, strongly tapered anteriorly, and dorsally concave,
with a chitinous cap covering its anterior third, and, in
particular, in having a transverse ring or furrow and a
projecting, tongue-like columella.   The micropyles are
scattered at the anterior pole.  
        Embryo    .   The fully
developed embryo is completely enclosed by an embryonic
cuticle within the chorion.   The abdominal part of this is
clothed with numerous tiny, posteriorly directed scales,
similar to those described by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916) in
various mantid embryos.   Anteriorly a strongly pigmented,
dark brown or black cephalic cap (Fig. 43) protects the
greatly enlarged and swollen vertex of the embryo.   This is
dome-shaped and, when flattened, subrhomboidal in outline.
  It is smooth and finely porose, and has a zone of strongly
incised cellular patterning along its lateral borders&semi; the
median border of patterning is sharply defined.
  Dorsoposteriorly it is emarginate and has a caudal
lobe or tail with a mid-dorsal ridge or fold and a line of
refractive spots which extends forwards on the cap.
  Ventroposteriorly it is triangular, and is formed into a
slender rod which, after hatching, comes to lie beneath the
folded membranous clypeus and partly beneath the strong
labrum.   The labrum is spatulate, truncate anteriorly, and
rounded posteriorly, with lateral and transverse apodemes
and studded with strong, small, refractive, posteriorly
directed scales.   Together with the cephalic cap and
ventral rod it may be part of the mechanism by which the
pronymph escapes from the egg and ootheca.   The embryo is
very similar to that of   Sphodromantis guttata  
(Thunb.) described and illustrated by Williams &amp; Buxton
(1916).  
        Hatching    .   The pronymph
splits the egg chorion longitudinally at the anterior pole
and squirms its way upwards, squeezing between the egg-chamber
closing flap and the chamber wall, through the plug of
foam-like material and out to the exterior of the ootheca.
  The embryonic cuticle is immediately moulted, and the
first-instar nymph emerges.   The process by which the
pronymph escapes from the egg has been described for
  Mantis religiosa   by Przibram (1907), for  
Sphodromantis guttata   by Williams &amp; Buxton (1916), and
for   Miomantis paykullii   St&aring;l
by Kumar (1973).   The part of the head between the eyes of
the emerging nymph becomes distended like a balloon and filled
with air.   By means of continual upward movement
(presumably contractions and pulsations distending the
balloon) the pronymph eventually breaks out of the egg and
squirms its way out of the ootheca.   The labrum, ventral
rod, and cephalic cap of the pronymph are no doubt important
in this process.  
      The latter part of the emergence of   O.
novaezealandiae   has been described and illustrated by
Suckling (1978) and by Castle (1988), and takes from seven to
ten or more minutes from the time the pronymph begins to
emerge from the ootheca.   The pronymph is attached to the
ootheca by a pair of long, fine hatching filaments so that the
cast-off embryonic cuticle with its cephalic shield remains
attached after the nymph has emerged.   The hatching
filaments, which are unique to mantids, are produced by
proliferations of cells of the embryonic cercus, and are
attached to the inner surface of the chorion at the posterior
pole of the egg.   They are composed of alpha-chitin (Rudall
1962), and develop from a helical filament of thread-forming
cells which transform into a syncytium and then secrete a
sheath of chitin around themselves (Kenchington 1969, 1984).
  These were first described by Pawlowa (1896, cited in
Williams &amp; Buxton 1916).  
        Immature stages    .   The
nymphs pass through six instars before becoming adult
(Suckling 1978)&semi; in mantids generally the number of
instars varies from six to nine (Beier 1968).   Development
takes from 3 to 6 months, and adults do not usually appear
until mid February at the earliest.   There is some evidence
that development may be synchronous, despite variation in
availability of food (Crosby 1984).   However, first-instar
nymphs occur from mid September through to January.   In
one instance, an ootheca laid on 25 April hatched on 26
October (183 days), the first stadium lasted 20 days, the
second 19 days, the third 10 days, the fourth 11 days, the
fifth 11 days, and the sixth 15 days, i.e., 86 days from
hatching to adult, and 269 days from oviposition to adulthood
(B. Tremain, pers. comm.).  
    First instars are 6.5 mm long and bright green in
colour except for a broad, longitudinal, mid-dorsal dark brown
band on the head and body which disappears after the first
moult.   The pronotum has the characteristic lateral
expansions but is more strongly tapered than in the later
stages.   Also, there is a thin, pale longitudinal line
passing mid-dorsally for the length of the body.   It is at
the crest of the pronotal ridge and causes the rest of the
body to appear ridged also.   Thereafter the nymphs are
uniformly bright green except for a reddish-brown border on
either side for the entire length of the body in some larger
nymphs, which may also have a mid-ventral longitudinal white
stripe on the abdomen, and the middle femora may be reddish
brown.  
    As with all small mantid nymphs, especially the first
instar, the head and eyes are proportionately much larger than
the rest of the body.   The lateral borders of the
prothorax of the first-instar nymph are already slightly
expanded, but not straight-sided as in the larger instars.
  There is a slight expansion above the attachment of the
raptorial legs.   The stance of the nymphs is
characteristic, in that the body is held more or less straight
rather than with the abdomen curled upwards (Sharell
1971).  
        Biological notes      
        Flight    .   Both males and
females of   O. novaezealandiae   fly, but the females
more reluctantly.   During late summer and early autumn
males are frequently attracted to lights at night, and can be
found on the window panes of lighted rooms.   They are also
attracted to mercury vapour lamps, and will settle on
light-trapping sheets or on walls in the vicinity of such a
lamp (C. Green, pers. comm.).  
        Behaviour    .     O.
novaezealandiae   is a relatively placid species, not
nearly as active and aggressive as   M. caffra  .
  Only rarely will it venture indoors, neither staying for
long nor laying oothecae there.   It further differs from
  M. caffra   in preferring to rest on the upper surface
of leaves and twigs.   Often several individuals can be
found similarly oriented, presenting the maximum upper body
surface area to the sun.     M. caffra   tends to hang
upside down from twigs and leaves when at rest.   This may
explain why its body is so strongly curved, especially in the
immature stages, gravity pulling the abdomen into a downward
(dorsad) curve.  
      O. novaezealandiae   may sometimes be observed
with a captured housefly held in the raptorial forelegs.
  Occasionally two mantids will capture the same fly and
proceed to devour it (Homewood 1978).   An instance of
deliberate piracy was observed by T.K. Crosby (pers. comm.).
  A female devouring a honeybee was stealthily approached
from the left rear by another female, which gradually
positioned itself to the front before grabbing the prey.
  In the ensuing fracas the mantids frequently struck at
each other with their forelegs.   The original owner failed
to repossess its half-eaten prey, and eventually moved away.
  During this latter phase, which lasted some 10 minutes,
the robbed mantid faced the aggressor with its forelegs folded
but turned outwards to display the femoral colour patches.
  Its wings were slightly spread also.   The aggressor
held its prize with the left foreleg, which was extended at
'arm 's length' to the side&semi; the right foreleg was turned
outwards to display the femoral colour patch.   When the bee
was first captured the pirate mantid was at least 1.5 m
distant and deliberately moved to challenge the captor for its
prey.  
        Colour    .   The coloration of
  O. novaezealandiae   is relatively constant.
  Apart from very rare instances of luteinism - bright
yellow individuals - reported for this species (see p. 44), it
is invariably a bright green, with little or no variation
apart from amounts of a reddish-brown pigment which sometimes
occur on the vertex, the lateral rims of the pronotum, the
leading edge of the forewings, and on the middle and hind
legs.  
        Interspecific mating    .   There
have been several observations of males of this species
mating with females of   M. caffra  .   In one
instance, at Parnell, Auckland, 5 April 1989, the pair were
closely examined to ensure that copulation was actually taking
place (D.T. Gardiner, D. Cowley, pers. comm.).   Whether or
not fertile eggs or parthenogenetic development resulted is
unknown, but hybrids have never been found (Ramsay, in
prep.).  
        Sex ratio    .   Even though few
males of   O. novaezealandiae   are lost by sexual
cannibalism, few of them survive through to late autumn and
winter.   Probably their lifespan is shorter than that of
females.   In contrast, all males of   M. caffra  
disappear within a short period, probably as a result of
sexual cannibalism.      
  

      HISTORY OF COLONIZATION  
    There were at least 24 successful liberations of
fallow in New Zealand between 1860 and 1910 (Challies, 1985a).
  Some initially successful populations later died out, or
merged.   In the 1980s, 13 discrete wild populations remain
(Table 86)&semi; the histories of the nine largest surviving herds
are as follows.  
    (1)   South Kaipara herd  .   The owner of the
South Kaipara Head Station in 1900, Alfred Buckland, was a
foundation member of the Auckland Acclimatisation Society, and
introduced fallow for sport and meat&semi; in the early years
venison was sold to station employees (Lane, 1982).   In the
1920s hunting by invitation was instituted under licence, and
there was also some culling because of damage to crops.
  All protection was removed in 1930.   After 1939, the
South Kaipara Head estate was subdivided into small farms.
  About 1955, the owner of the largest block, Waioneke (880
ha), started a conservation programme for fallow.   The herd
flourished, and by 1969 up to 1700 deer were present on
private farms.   The herd produced the top New Zealand
fallow deer trophies for five of the six years to 1971 (Lane,
1982).   Since the development of commercial hunting and of
deer farming during the 1970s, the numbers of wild fallow have
fallen (Spiro, 1979).   Most of those left are found in
Woodhill State Forest.  
    (2)   Matamata herd  .   This herd was
established from English stock in 1877.   Thomson (1922)
stated that the   "herd has increased very largely, and
is noted for the fine heads of the stags  "     and
reckoned that over 1000 deer had been harvested.   Since
then, gradual habitat loss through land clearance has greatly
reduced the herd&semi; the small residual population lives mainly
on private land.  
    (3)   Te Puke herd  .   Established by the
transfer of stock from Motutapu I. in 1884 and augmented by
additions from Otago in 1908, this population was also
initially successful, but has decreased because of habitat
loss and intensified hunting pressure.   Live trapping for
farm stock has further reduced numbers in recent years, and
only small numbers remain.   Unlike the predominantly black
phase fallow populations elsewhere in New Zealand, about half
the Te Puke herd are of the "Spanish" strain (Egan, 1969).  
    (4)   Wanganui herd  .   This herd developed
from two liberations, one well up the Wanganui River in 1877
(Thomson, 1922&semi; Donne 1924), and the other at Featherstone
Stream, Kaiwhaiki, later in the 1880s (Walton, 1986).   The
growth of the herd was apparently slow to start with, although
the first fallow shooting licences were issued before 1889.
  Further attempts to add to the herd quality were not
successful until 1935, when a "Spanish" strain doe from the Te
Puke herd was introduced (Walton, 1986).   By the 1920s, the
herd was   "too  "     numerous and several
hundred animals were removed (Donne, 1924).   All protection
was lifted in 1930.   However, the herd continued to spread,
and at its peak occupied an area of 60 x 40 km.   An
isolated group of fallow to the north suggests that the spread
of this herd was probably assisted by man (W. J. Simmons,
unpubl.).   From the 1960s onward numbers declined to very
low levels on public land and on many farms.   On other
farms, however, the deer are protected, and some high density
pockets remain (P. Butler, unpubl.).  
    (5)   Mount Arthur herd  .   This herd was
established by translocation of an unknown number of deer,
probably from Otago.   There were two liberations, one at
Barrons flat near Takaka, and the other at Flora Saddle.
  It reached peak densities in the 1940s, but declined soon
after (Clarke, 1976b).  
    (6)   Aniseed Valley herd  .   This herd is
derived from an original liberation of English stock in 1864,
plus additional animals transferred from the Wakatipu herd in
1906.   It may have reached peak densities as early as the
1920s, after which intensified hunting kept numbers in check,
although perhaps also stimulating dispersal (Clarke, 1976b).
  The range of the herd has not changed in recent years.  
    (7)   Paparoa herd  .   Red deer were absent
from the Paparoa Range in the late 1880s, when fallow were
translocated there from Motutapu I.&semi; so this herd increased
quickly and expanded north.   Peak numbers were reached
between 1925 and 1935, and persisted till the 1950s (Clarke,
1976b).   By the 1980s, fallow remained only in pockets
along the eastern flank of the Paparoa Range, and densities
were low and static (Morse, 1981).  
  table: Table 86: History, location and status of the 13
herds of wild fallow deer in New Zealand.  
    (8)   Wakatipu herd  .   The origins of this
herd are not certain, but the foundation stock was probably
supplied by the Otago Acclimatisation Society from the Blue
Mountains.   By the 1930s, a forest ranger, D. Dunn,
reported extensive damage to the indigenous forest, and that
  "not a vestige of feed remained"   (Rose, 1977).
  Subsequent culling (including poisoning trials&semi; Daniel,
1966b) may have reduced the herd slightly, but the greatest
reduction was achieved after the commercialization of
hunting.  
    (9)   Blue Mountains herd  .   The original
animals were imported from Tasmania in 1869, with the
intention of establishing an English-style deer park at
Tapanui.   The deer became very numerous, and by 1899 had
dispersed into the adjacent Blue Mountains.   By 1903, over
2000 fallow bucks had been shot by licensed stalkers,
including many which yielded large trophies (Donne, 1924).
  The herd increased further, causing damage to farm crops
and eating out the understorey of the indigenous forest.
  In 1923 all protection was removed from the herd, and in
1926, 3890 deer tails were collected by NZFS from the Blue
Mountains area (Baker, 1972).   Despite continued heavy
hunting pressure and poisoning trials, the population remained
high until the 1950s and was generally in poor condition
(Wodzicki, 1950&semi; Shearing, 1965&semi; Daniel, 1967&semi; Baker, 1973).
  After 1960 hunting pressure increased, and the reported
kill from the state forests making up the core of the range
declined from 2000 per year in the early 1960s, to around 400
in 1984 (Nugent, 1985).  
    There were also some unsuccessful liberations.
  Fallow disappeared after release at Cairn Bush (Otago) in
1899 (Wodzicki, 1950)&semi; in the Morven Hills (Otago) in 1867
(Baker, 1972)&semi; and at Hawarden (Canterbury) in 1882 (Lamb,
1964).   Two fallow released on Kapiti I. in 1900 either
died out or were shot when the island was made a sanctuary
(Wodzicki, 1950).   Fallow deer liberated near Whangamoa
(Nelson) were exterminated about 1912 because they damaged
crops (Clarke, 1976b).   A herd established on Kawau I. by
Sir George Grey in 1862-64 became extinct about 1966 (K.
Purdon, unpubl.).   A small herd near Coromandel, derived
from releases around 1900 near Thames, is reported to have
died out after 1963 (K. Purdon, unpubl.), but there are
persistent rumours that wild fallow still survive there (G. W.
Asher, unpubl. and Map 37).   Christie and Andrews (1966)
refer to a northern Auckland population, and Wodzicki (1950)
states that fallow were present in Herbert State Forest, north
of Dunedin, but there are no recent reports of fallow in these
areas.  
    The total number of fallow imported before 1910 was
probably only 50-60 animals, so many of the liberations
involved translocations of stock from elsewhere in New
Zealand.   All the documented importations came from
England, Wales or Tasmania, and the Tasmanian fallow herds
were themselves probably all derived from English stock
(Bentley, 1967&semi; Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1980).   Since the advent
of deer farming in the 1970s, farmers interested in livestock
improvement have begun a second wave of importations,
including stock from outside Britain (p. 490&semi; Otway, 1986&semi;
Massey, 1987).  
      DISTRIBUTION    
    WORLD.   Fallow are indigenous to countries
bordering the Mediterranean
  map: Map 43 Distribution of fallow deer in New Zealand  
(Lister, 1984).   They have been introduced to all
continents (38 countries) and are now among the most
widespread of ungulates.   The most complete summaries of
their present world distribution are provided by Chapman and
Chapman (1980) and Lever (1985).  
    NEW ZEALAND (Map 43, Table 86).   Fallow are the
second most widespread deer species in the wild in New
Zealand.   The 13 wild populations are scattered from north
of Auckland to Southland (latitudes 36&deg; to
46&deg;S).   The herd on Rangitoto-Motutapu Is.
(the two islands are joined at low tide) is near extinction,
and the South Manukau, Kaikoura I. and South Canterbury
(Burkes Pass-Two Thumb region) herds are small, and, although
wild, almost totally confined to private farmland.   The
remaining nine herds are truly wild and well established on
both public and private lands as follows.  
    (1)   South Kaipara  : Wild fallow are virtually
restricted to Woodhill State Forest (14 700 ha), although
there are thousands of fallow on nearby farms (Spiro,
1979).  
    (2)   Matamata  : Fallow are present in the
Maungakawa and Matamata ranges (Te Miro and Te Tapui Scenic
Reserves) and on private land around Whitehall (S. Kelton,
unpubl.).  
    (3)   Te Puke  : Oripi and Otanewainuku State
Forests, plus Otawa and other Scenic Reserves, in patches of
Crown land and on private farmland (M. C. Llewellyn,
unpubl.).  
    (4)   Wanganui  : From the Waitotara River to
the Whangaehu River, and northwards on both sides of the
Wanganui River beyond Jerusalem, including Lismore State
Forest&semi; also south-east of the Waitotara Forest in Taranaki,
in Waitotara, Tarere, and Kapara State Forests, and Patokino
Reserve (S. D. Kelton &amp; W. J. Simmons, unpubl&semi; J. Barkla,
unpubl.).  
    (5)   Mount Arthur  : Most of the Mount Arthur
Tablelands region, the Grecian and Flora catchments, and the
lower Cobb valley (Hayward, 1983).  
    (6)   Aniseed Valley  : Bryant Range, Pelorus
River valley, Mount Richmond and extending into Marlborough
(Clarke, 1976b).  
    (7)   Paparoa Range  : From Blackball to the
Inangahua Landing, mainly on the eastern flank of the Paparoa
Range (Morse, 1981).  
    (8)   Wakatipu  : Greenstone and Caples valleys,
and Mount Creighton&semi; plus a few in the Moonlight and adjacent
catchments in the Shotover region, on the eastern foothills of
the Humboldt Mountains, and occasionally in the Earnslaw, Rees
and Dart catchments (Cuddihy &amp; Ross, 1979).  
    (9)   Blue Mountains  : Beaumont, Rankleburn and
Tapanui State Forests, and on private farmland around the
south-east and northern margins of these.   Also in pockets
of bush on the eastern bank of the Clutha River, and in
Glendhu State Forest, 15 km to the north-east (N. Hills,
unpubl.).  
    In addition, fallow may legally be farmed in most
rural areas of the North and South Islands, and many farms are
well outside the present range of wild fallow.   It is
inevitable that escapes from farms or illegal liberations will
extend the distribution of wild fallow deer&semi; such incidents
have already been reported from near Oxford (10 deer) and on
Banks Peninsula (2 deer) in Canterbury.  
      HABITAT    
    Fallow occupy a wide range of habitats, ranging from
improved pasture on farms to dense rain forest on the west
coast of the South Island (Table 86).   Most wild fallow
live in indigenous forest or shrubland, especially around the
scrubby margins of farms whose owners provide some protection
from hunting.   They also occupy commercial plantations
(Lismore, Woodhill, Blue Mountains).   Fallow in the South
Island formerly made some use of the subalpine tussock zone in
the Mount Arthur, Blue Mountains, Paparoa and Wakatipu areas,
but the species always appeared to be more at home in the low
altitude forests, and the low density populations of the 1980s
seldom venture above timberline (e.g., Buckingham,
1985).    
      FOOD    
    Fallow eat a wide range of plant species, including
most, if not all, of those eaten by domestic stock.   In the
wild in New Zealand they prefer the same indigenous plants as
other deer (see red deer, p. 444, and Wodzicki, 1950), their
diet depending on which of these is locally available.
  They have a high ratio of rumen volume to body weight
compared with other cervids (Hoffman, 1985).   Hoffman
suggests that this reflects a greater adaptation to
non-selective grazing of short sward grasses and herbs than in
other cervids, which tend to concentrate more on selective
browsing of trees and shrubs.   Around farm margins and on
deer farms, fallow readily graze introduced grass and herb
species, but they can also thrive in indigenous forests even
where grasses are scarce.  
    A study of fallow deer diet in the Blue Mountains
between 1982 and 1984 (G. Nugent, unpubl.) showed marked
differences in diet between habitat types.   In commercial
pine forest, where deer densities were low and introduced
plant species common, the five most important summer foods (in
decreasing order of importance) were grasses, herbs, fungi
(mainly mushrooms), broadleaf (  Griselinia
littoralis  ) and small-leaved   Coprosma   species.
  In winter, broadleaf became more important and fungi less
important, but grass was still by far the most common food.
  Fallow also ate small quantities of introduced weeds such
as gorse (  Ulex europaeus  ), broom (  Cytisus
scoparius  ), blackberry (  Rubus fruticosa  ) and
Himalayan honeysuckle (  Leycesteria formosa  ).
  Woody browse appeared to be an important dietary
requirement&semi; even on lush pasture fallow still occasionally
ate gorse and broom.   None of the planted conifers was
touched.  
    In silver beech forests (  Nothofagus
menziesii  ), the important summer foods were fungi,
broadleaf, lichen (mainly   Usnea   spp.),
  Coprosma   spp. and grasses&semi; the main winter foods
were broadleaf,   Coprosma   spp.,   Carpodetus
serratus   and   Pseudopanax   spp.   The heavy
reliance on fungi and lichen reflected the scarcity of
palatable foliage within the reach of deer, as most developing
seedlings of preferred species were eliminated at an early
age.   Most of the leaves eaten had fallen from the canopy,
especially in winter when they were knocked down by snow and
wind.  
      SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND BEHAVIOUR    
    Undisturbed fallow tend to be gregarious, with a
highly developed social tolerance (Massey, 1985).   The
Wakatipu herd, in particular, was well known for the large
groups (100+), containing all age and sex classes, that grazed
the valley flats in the 1950s.   However, heavy hunting
during the 1960s and 1970s reduced the herd so much that
groups of more than three or four became rare by the 1980s (R.
Martin, unpubl.).  
    Home range size depends to some extent on the
distribution of resources, but is often &lt;100
ha (Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1975).   Ranges are not exclusive&semi;
those of males tend to be larger than those of females, and
divided into separate summer and rutting ranges.  
    Fallow deer have a variety of vocalizations.
  During the rut, males groan repeatedly and loudly to
advertise their location.   When startled, females, in
particular, often bark loudly several times, at about
10-20-second intervals.   Does with young fawns may produce
a medium high-pitched bleat, and deer of any age may accompany
submission postures with a higher-pitched mewing sound.
  Fawns make a different high-pitched peeping sound when
distressed, or to contact their dams.   Younger deer, in
particular, may scream when wounded or captured.  
    Fallow also communicate with each other visually.
  When mildly disturbed, one member of a group may adopt an
"alert" posture, with the neck extended vertically and the
body held rigid, and the rest of the group will often follow
suit even if unaware of the danger.   They may also stamp
their hooves, and walk stiff-legged towards the potential
danger, usually holding the tail upright.   Fallow may flee
a mild disturbance with a slightly exaggerated rhythmic trot,
or a bouncing gait in which all four feet leave the ground
simultaneously, but they usually flee a sudden disturbance at
the gallop, often with a low "woof" of alarm.  
    The rut begins in April.   Males lose interest in
food and their necks swell.   They establish rutting
territories by making several scrapes in the ground with their
forefeet, and urinating in them.   Surrounding bushes are
thrashed and scent-marked with secretions from the preorbital
glands.   Rutting males on farms may groan for several
weeks, but those in hunted populations often restrict groaning
to one or two days at the peak of the rut (R. Webb, D.
Harrison, unpubl.).   In the Blue Mountains, Baker (1973)
heard groaning periodically between 31 March and 17 May,
mostly between 22 April and 6 May.  
    Antlers are cast in October or November, and the
development of new ones is usually complete by February
(Riney, 1954).  
    It is generally accepted that females are attracted to
the rutting stand by the presence of the male.   They are
not usually herded up into a harem as in other deer (Chapman &amp;
Chapman, 1975), except on farms (Anon., 1984c).   In high
density undisturbed populations, males do not usually breed
until at least four years of age, because subordinate bucks
are excluded from mating by the older bucks.   However, most
of the heavily hunted wild populations in New Zealand now
contain few such fully mature bucks (Baker, 1973), so even
yearling males may get the chance to breed.   Mating
behaviour is described in detail by Asher and Kilgour
(1985).  
      REPRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT    
    Fallow reproduction in New Zealand is described by
Asher (1985b) and Baker (1973).   Does usually breed for the
first time at 16 months of age, although it is possible for
fawns to conceive in their first year of life (Ueckerman &amp;
Hansen, 1968).   Fallow are polyoestrous.   Does may have
up to six oestrous cycles during the breeding season, with a
mean cycle length of 22.4 +/- 1.3 (SD) days.   The first
oestrus of the season is synchronized within a 2-week period
in late April, although young does breeding for the first time
usually come into oestrus a week later than older does.
  Most breeding does conceive during the first cycle.
  The average gestation period of 88 farm does was 234.2 +/-
2.7 (SD) days (Asher, 1985b), and the main peak of births was
in mid December.   There was a second, much smaller peak in
births about 21-22 days later, and some births (2-3%) as late
as March.   Twinning is rare.  
    Sterba and Klusak (1984) and Chapman and Chapman
(1975) describe the development of fallow.   Newborn fawns
tend to remain hidden for several weeks, except when the doe
returns to feed them.   They begin to take solid food almost
immediately, although rumination does not begin until the
second or third week after birth.   Lactation may continue
for up to 9 months, but many fawns are weaned at 4-5
months.  
    The full adult dentition is usually in place by 2.5
years of age (Chapman &amp; Chapman, 1975).   Males begin to
develop antlers at 7-9 months of age and reach sexual maturity
in their second year (Baker, 1973).   Females appear to
reach full body size by 6 years of age, whereas males may not
be fully grown until their ninth year.  
      POPULATION DYNAMICS    
    There are no accurate estimates of the total number of
wild fallow in New Zealand, but it is unlikely there were many
more than 5000 in 1985 (some details on individual herds, past
and present, are given in Table 86).   By contrast, there
were probably about 30 000 fallow deer on farms at that time
(G. W Asher, unpubl.).   Pemberton and Smith (1985) cite a
1984 world population estimate of 164 000.  
    Baker (1973) reports a pregnancy rate of 91.4% for 70
wild does more than 1 year old.   The pregnancy rate of does
in their second year is generally lower than that of older
does.   The sex ratio at birth is probably close to 1:1
(Baker, 1973&semi; Sterba &amp; Klusak, 1984&semi; Asher &amp; Adams, 1985).  
    Although fallow may live for up to 32 years (Ueckerman
&amp; Hansen, 1968), the oldest male among 351 deer shot in the
Blue Mountains in 1971 was 8 years old and the oldest female
12 (Baker, 1973).   In the 1980s mortality not due to
hunting appeared to be rare in the Blue Mountains, as no
natural mortality was observed among an average of 30 young
deer during a 2-year radio-tracking study (G. Nugent,
unpubl.).   In unprotected herds in New Zealand most deer
are shot within the first two years of life, males sooner, on
average, than females (Baker, 1973&semi; Nugent, 1985).   Such
mortality patterns produce a predominantly female adult
population with a high annual productivity.   Nugent (1985)
estimated that 40 fawns were born for every 100 deer present
in the Blue Mountains before the 1984 fawning season.  
    Fallow tend to remain close to where they were born,
which explains why they were slow to disperse from liberation
points&semi; the Wanganui herd spread at 0.8 km/year (Caughley,
1963), the South Kaipara herd at 0.6 km/year (from Lane, 1982)
and the Paparoa herd at 0.8 km/year (Clarke, 1976b).   Most
dispersal is by young males nearing the end of their first
year, and typically, these move less than 3 km from their
natal range (G. Nugent, unpubl. telemetry data, Blue
Mountains).   By contrast, shifts of up to 32 km have been
recorded in red deer in the Cupola basin (Gibb &amp; Flux,
1973).  
    Fallow may have a competitive advantage over red deer,
as Challies (1985a) noted that red deer have tended not to
establish in areas, such as the Blue Mountains and Wakatipu,
where fallow had already reached high density.   Kean (1959)
considers that fallow can displace red deer except at high
altitudes.   Batcheler (1960) suggested that fallow in
Scotland were better adapted to a mature forest environment
than red deer.  
      PREDATORS, PARASITES AND DISEASES    
    In New Zealand the only predators of fallow are man
and dogs.   Although dogs are seldom used specifically to
catch deer, the dogs used to hunt pigs occasionally catch
them, especially fawns up to three months old (S. Cook,
unpubl.).
On farms fallow are prone to facial eczema, pneumonia,
ryegrass staggers and possibly leptospirosis, but yersiniosis
and malignant catarrhal fever are unheard of (Massey, 1985).
  Free-ranging fallow are generally regarded as disease
resistant and healthy (Spiro, 1979).   However, Christie and
Andrews (1966), Daniel (1967), Andrews (1973) and others
report the incidence of a number of parasites and diseases in
fallow in New Zealand, as follows.   Protozoa:
  Eimeria   sp. (Collins, 1981b).   Trematoda:
Paramphistomatidae (P. C. Mason, unpubl.).   Cestoda:
  Taenia hydatigena   (Sweatman &amp; Williams, 1962) and
  Moniezia   sp. (P. C. Mason &amp; N. Gladden, unpubl.).
  Nematoda:   Dictyocaulus viviparus   in the lungs
(Wilson &amp; Collier, 1981),   Apteragia odocoilei,
Spiculopteragia asymmetria   and   Trichostrongylus
axei   in the abomasum (Andrews, 1973&semi; P. C. Mason,
unpubl.),   Capilleria   sp. in the small intestine (P.
C. Mason, unpubl.),   Oesophagostomum venulosum   and
  Trichuris   sp. in the large intestine (Andrews, 1973&semi;
P. C. Mason &amp; N. Gladden, unpubl.).   Acari:
  Haemophysalis longicornis   (cattle tick) on the skin
(P. R. Wilson, unpubl.).  
      ADAPTATION TO NEW ZEALAND CONDITIONS    
    Despite an apparently limited genetic base, fallow
deer have adapted well to New Zealand conditions.   When
provided with adequate cover or protection, they have occupied
a wide range of habitats and reached high densities in many
areas.   Although they are normally animals of the forest
margin, fallow in the Blue Mountains and elsewhere have
thrived in forested areas with few clearings.   Their patchy
distribution (relative to red deer) appears to be a
consequence of their site tenacity and slow dispersal rate.
  As with red deer, the period of highest metabolic demand
(fawning and lactation) starts in December, after the main
spring flush of plant growth.   Because of this, fallow are,
at this stage, less suited to farming than sheep or cattle,
particularly in areas prone to summer drought.   However,
crossbreeding experiments with Persian fallow now in progress
(Otway, 1986) may produce an earlier-calving strain more
likely to do well on New Zealand farms in future.  
    At the low densities prevailing in the 1980s, wild
fallow in New Zealand appear to be about the same size as both
farmed fallow in New Zealand and English park fallow, since
the lower jaw lengths of adults are much the same regardless
of origin (Table 85).   However, overseas the most frequent
coat colour phase is red-brown with conspicuous spots, whereas
in New Zealand (except in the Te Puke herd) it is the black
phase with faint spots or none.  
      SIGNIFICANCE TO THE NEW ZEALAND ENVIRONMENT    
    DAMAGE AND CONTROL.   Fallow deer have caused severe
modification to indigenous vegetation in some areas (Wodzicki,
1950&semi; Christie &amp; Andrews, 1966&semi; Rose, 1977&semi; Bathgate, 1977&semi;
Hayward, 1983), although most populations live in areas
already massively modified by man.   Major control campaigns
to alleviate damage were conducted in the Blue Mountains and
Wakatipu areas (Wodzicki, 1950&semi; Daniel, 1966b&semi; Baker, 1972),
and there has been smaller-scale control work in other areas
(Donne, 1924&semi; Harris, 1967&semi; Lane, 1982).   The general
reductions in density since the 1960s have removed the need
for active control.  
      CURRENT MANAGEMENT.   The flighty nature and
small size of fallow deer, and the low demand for their antler
velvet, have made them less commercially desirable than red
deer (Yerex, 1982).   One consequence of this is that fallow
have been substantially involved in recent developments
relating to recreational hunting.  
    Much of the range of the Blue Mountains herd was
gazetted as the first Recreational Hunting Area (RHA) in 1980
(under the 1977 Wild Animals Control Act), and is now managed
with the needs of sport hunters in mind (Nugent &amp; Mawhinney,
1987).   Since then, recreational hunting has further
decreased the deer population within the RHA, and in late 1986
restrictions on hunting were imposed (NZFS, 1986).   RHAs
have also been established in the Wakatipu (1981) and Mount
Arthur (1981) areas, and similar hunting restrictions imposed
(Hayward &amp; Hosking, 1986).  
    In the North Island, the fallow population in Woodhill
has been managed for recreational hunting (Lane, 1982&semi; Deuss,
1983b&semi; Broome, 1985), although Woodhill is not gazetted as an
RHA.   In Wanganui, positive management intended to build up
the herd in Lismore State Forest began in April 1985 with the
liberation of 21 fallow does from Blue Mountains and South
Kaipara stock (Simmons, 1985&semi; Benes, 1986).   This was the
first officially sanctioned release of farm deer into the wild
since deer were declared noxious animals in the 1930s, and
reflects the recent fundamental change in official attitudes
to wild animal management in New Zealand.  
    The remaining herds of fallow on public land are also
at low density, and few animals are harvested annually (Table
86).   Legal access to these herds is usually difficult to
obtain.  
    Farming of fallow began slowly, because of the limited
availability of stock, and because fallow were more difficult
to handle using conventional livestock techniques (Fitzi &amp;
Monk, 1977&semi; Spiro, 1979&semi; Massey, 1985, 1986).   However
Waioneke Park, one of the first large deer farms, demonstrated
that the species could be successfully farmed (Spiro, 1979),
and substantial numbers of wild fallow have been caught using
pen traps, tranquillizer darts, drive nets, or helicopters
(Spiro, 1979&semi; Yerex, 1982).   As with other deer, fallow
have a lower fat content and higher muscle to bone ratio than
sheep and cattle (Gregson &amp; Purchas, 1985).   Many farmers
now believe that fallow provide a better quality venison than
red deer, and fallow are becoming increasingly common on farms
(Massey, 1986&semi; Walton, 1986).      
  

        CHAPTER 7    
      PASTURE ASSESSMENT FOR LIVESTOCK
MANAGERS    
  R. J. Lucas and K. F. Thompson
  table (of chapter contents)  
          7.1
Introduction        
    All pastoral farmers assess pastures when managing
livestock.   Often these assessments are expressed
qualitatively as  'short of feed' or 'having a surplus' and are
based on experience from previous seasons.   Recently,
however, visual assessment and non-destructive instruments
such as capacitance meters, plate meters, and sward sticks
have been developed for rapid, quantitative measurement of
pasture mass.   In addition, livestock managers need to
estimate the proportion of plant species as well as the green
leaf and dead material composition of swards, as these
components have a major influence on pasture feeding value and
hence animal productivity.   Prediction of pasture
production is also an important part of effective feed
planning.  
    This chapter describes briefly feed planning, gives
suggestions for rapid pasture assessment by farmers, and
discusses pasture assessment methods of direct relevance to
livestock managers in commercial farming, consultancy, or
research.  
          7.2 Planning pasture
feeding        
    Efficient pastoral farming depends firstly on
establishing the annual stocking rate appropriate for the
expected pasture production, and secondly on managing seasonal
feeding levels to maximize livestock productivity.
  Livestock production per ha (stocking rate x production
per head) is used to compare productivity of livestock systems
and can also be used as an indication of pasture production.
  For example, on a dairy farm producing 525 kg/ha of
milkfat, the dry matter (DM) intake will be about 12 500 kg/ha
annually (see also Section 7.3.4).   Dairy farmers are
fortunate as they have a daily measurement of milk production,
and this gives a good indication of the animal response to
grazing management and animal husbandry.   Sheep and beef
farmers use lambing and calving percentages, fleece weights,
and carcass weights.   These measures are derived at the end
of the production cycle and the effect of earlier pasture
management on livestock productivity several months later is
often difficult to determine.   For more rapid feedback on
performances, live-weight targets are used on sheep and cattle
farms to set seasonal and short-term pasture feeding
objectives.   Accurate livestock scales and their regular
use are important for efficiently managed pastoral
enterprises.  
    The need for pasture planning depends on the intensity
of the farming system and the level of production.   Farmers
who aim for high productivity per ha regularly use some method
of feed planning.   Generally, when pasture production is
lower than expected, particularly in droughts, feed planning
is adopted more widely.   Assessments of the quantity of
pasture on a farm and prediction of pasture production in the
coming season are essential for planning of pasture feeding.
  Pasture cover (kg/ha DM) is the current pasture resource
on a farm and is estimated from the total pasture mass divided
by the grazed area.   In addition, data on rate of pasture
production are used to predict future pasture supply.
  Standard data (Table 7.1) and previous experience are
modified by a knowledge of current soil moisture status,
expected rainfall, and temperature over the feed-planning
period.   The use and methods of assessing pasture cover and
rate of production are described in more detail in Sections
7.3 and 7.4.   How this information is used will depend on
the type of decision required.  
    The outline of feed planning on pasture which follows
is based on a more detailed description presented by Milligan
  et al.   (1987).   It is important to define
objectives and to distinguish between feed profiling, feed
budgets, and grazing plans.  
      Feed profiling - for setting long-term policy
such as stocking rate, timing of lambing or calving, or
determining general stock buying and selling policy.  
    Feed budgets - for seasonal or medium-term planning to
decide the best use of a feed surplus or the least costly way
of overcoming a feed deficit.  
    Grazing plans - short-term planning to achieve desired
intakes.   Decisions relate to rotation length, how long
stock should stay in a paddock, or when to use conserved
feed.    
  graphs (Figure 7.1)    caption  
  table 7.1  
        7.2.1 Feed profiling      
    Feed profiling is used to determine the type of
livestock system that suits an expected pattern of pasture
production.   Feed profiles indicate the appropriate
stocking rate and timing of events that lead to changes in
livestock feed demand.   These events are the timing of
calving, lambing, fawning, and kidding, and the timing of sale
of surplus stock, or purchase of breeding replacements or
stock for finishing.   Feed profiling is usually done on an
annual basis and compares feed demand for the chosen stocking
rate and level of animal production with monthly pattern of
pasture production for average weather conditions.  
    Daily average feed demands (kg/ha DM) for each month
are obtained by adding the demand for each class of stock.
  These are calculated by multiplying the daily average
intake (kg/head DM) by stocking rate (animals/ha) for the
month.   Feed demand is usually graphed together with feed
supply - the daily rate of pasture production (kg/ha DM)
(Figure 7.1a).   To ensure that the system will work and the
desired intakes will be achieved, the pattern of pasture cover
(Section 7.3.1) is calculated (Figure 7.1b).   Hay or
silage-making and supplementary feeding can be planned to keep
pasture cover within the desirable limits of 1000-2500 kg/ha
DM.  
        7.2.2 Feed budgeting      
    Feed budgets should be undertaken whenever a feed
surplus or shortage appears to be developing.   The need to
budget will be indicated by pasture cover deviating from the
pattern associated with the feed profile for the system.
  The feed budget should result in a financial decision on
the most profitable way to use a surplus or the least costly
way of overcoming a deficit.  
    Pasture feed supply in a feed budget is calculated
from three items of information.   The starting point is the
pasture cover at the beginning of the budget period.
  Pasture produced during the budget period is added to this
and the desired pasture cover at the end is subtracted (Table
7.2).   Animal demand is calculated by adding the feed
required per ha for each class of animal (numbers in mob
&divide; farm area x daily per head intake x
days).   Animal demand is subtracted from pasture supply, to
give a measure of deficit or balance or surplus.   A deficit
can be met by either feeding supplements or accepting lower
feed intakes and stock performance.   When there is a
surplus the alternatives include conservation (hay, or
silage), purchasing more stock, or accepting higher intakes
and animal productivity.   Sometimes pasture growth rate may
need to be changed by applying, for example, irrigation,
nitrogen fertilizer, insecticides, or combinations
thereof.  
        7.2.3 Grazing plans      
    These are usually prepared where rotational grazing is
intensive and a farmer wishes to use a pasture feed bank to
achieve a particular level of animal productivity.   There
are two approaches, allowance and residual pasture mass, and
both methods calculate the grazing duration for a mob of
animals on a series of paddocks.   The feed planner must
know the pasture mass on each paddock at the time it is to be
grazed.   The allowance approach uses the relationship of
daily pasture allowance (kg/head DM) to animal productivity,
  table 7.2  
and the farmer selects the allowance associated with the
target animal productivity.   The calculation is:
  formula  
  The residual pasture mass approach uses relationships
between animal productivity and both post-grazing pasture mass
and intake.   The calculation is:
  formula    
      Livestock Feeding on Pasture   (Nicol, 1987)
presents relationships between animal productivity and pasture
allowance or residual pasture mass for most classes of stock
and discusses in detail the use of these relationships.
  Care is required in using these relationships, as several
factors affect grazing intake and animal productivity (see
Chapter 8).   Pasture mass, clover proportion, and dead
material are the important sward factors influencing pasture
intake and animal performance.  
  table 7.3  
    Grazing plans can also be formulated with
set-stocking.   Stocking rate is adjusted to achieve the
pasture mass (or pasture height) necessary for the desired
intake.   The opportunity to manipulate grazing conditions
to achieve short-term changes in intake is far less with
set-stocking than with rotational grazing.   Because the
allowance approach does not work, all decisions need to be
based on residual pasture mass or pasture height (Table 7.3).
  A knowledge of the effect of pasture height or mass on
intake and animal performance permits the farmer to allocate
different classes of stock to paddocks where the pasture is
appropriate to the desired intake.  
          7.3 Pasture assessment by
livestock managers        
    This section introduces methods farmers may use to
assess pasture mass, pasture cover, and rate of pasture
production.  
        7.3.1 Pasture mass and pasture
cover      
    Pasture cover is calculated by assessing the pasture
mass (kg/ha DM) on each paddock and multiplying by paddock
area and then adding these for all paddocks and dividing the
sum by total area.   This gives an average cover per ha.
  Some farmers prefer total cover (kg DM) rather than an
average&semi; that is, they do not divide by total area of the
farm.   This can be satisfactory but it involves very large
numbers, and is of little use for comparison with other farms
or recommended levels.   One short cut for assessing pasture
cover is to mean the pasture masses on the longest and
shortest paddocks, which gives an estimate of the cover over
the farm.   Paddock areas need to be similar for this to
work.  
    An essential part of pasture cover calculations is the
estimation of pasture mass.   Visual assessments are used
widely, although pasture height, pasture probes (capacitance
meters), and plate meters are also being used (see Section
7.4).   Variations on visual pasture assessments are many,
and the techniques developed in the New Zealand dairy industry
in the 1960s of assessing pasture cover as 'cow grazing days'
were the forerunners to current pasture feed planning.
  Some farmers score paddocks and assign a number (1-10)
according to their visual assessment of pasture mass.
  Others assess mass in kg/ha DM.   The unit by which
pastures are scored is immaterial, provided the farmer is
reliable and consistent in his estimates and ends up with data
that lead to useful and profitable decisions.   The
important point is that pastures should be inspected regularly
so that changes in the total pasture resource are observed and
quantified.  
    Pasture assessment is easiest where grazing is
rotational and variation among paddocks is considerable.
  With experience, farmers can rank paddocks accurately -
that is, identify those with least and greatest pasture mass.
  What is more difficult is converting ranking to kg/ha DM
and this will be discussed in Section 7.4.   The most
obvious visual characteristic is pasture height, which has a
major influence on all visual assessments.   For a
particular sward, mass and height are related strongly,
although there are seasonal differences in these relationships
(Figure 7.2).   There can also be big differences owing to
plant species.   For example, for swards of the same height,
pasture mass decreases as the proportion of white clover
increases, and pastures that are browntop-dominant have much
higher mass than ryegrass swards because of their greater
density in the lower parts of the sward.  
  graph (Figure 7.2)    caption  
    As a guide, the pasture mass of intensively managed
sheep pastures is generally greater than 2500 kg/ha DM when
the leaves on the longer ryegrass tillers start to lie flat.
  Visual grading can be accurate, but for reliability,
regular calibration against some standards is necessary,
particularly in spring when DM percentage, leaf:stem ratio,
and dead material content change.   With set-stocking,
pasture height, rather than pasture mass, may be more useful
for feed planning, particularly if livestock feeding standards
are also expressed in the same units.   Pasture height has
not been measured regularly in New Zealand studies, but the
recommendations of Hodgson   et al.   (1986) in Table
7.3 for the United Kingdom are likely to apply to New Zealand
and elsewhere.  
        7.3.2 Rate of pasture production      
    Livestock managers require an estimate of the present
and future rates of pasture production.   Regular
assessments throughout a year can be useful to build up
historical data for a farm to help with predictions.   In
this chapter, rate of pasture production (kg/ha/day) refers to
the net increase in DM per unit area, without reference to
separate processes of growth or decay.   Rate of pasture
production is often loosely referred to as 'rate of growth',
but this is not strictly correct, as new pasture growth is
partly offset by losses from death and decay of old leaves and
stems&semi; pasture production is the material available for
grazing or mowing since the previous defoliation.  
    The chances of making accurate predictions are
influenced mainly by seasonal climatic variability.   As
soils in temperate regions are usually well charged with water
by the onset of spring growth, pasture production in early
spring is reliable.   Summer and early autumn growth is
least reliable because of wide fluctuations in effective
summer rainfall (Radcliffe and Baars, 1987).  
    Pasture production has been measured from more than 23
sites in New Zealand under standard conditions over periods of
at least five years (Radcliffe, 1974).   The average daily
pasture production rates for each month, together with
standard errors as a measure of variability between years
(Table 7.1), are often used to guide farmers when they are
predicting rates of pasture production.   The 'rate of
growth' measurement technique used to derive the information
in Table 7.1 has limitations, and the data should be
interpreted in relation to local soil fertility, current
weather conditions, and pasture management.   Mowers were
used to harvest production at a standard height of 25 mm, from
pasture pre-trimmed and then protected from grazing by cages.
  The growth period was 14 days except during periods of
very low production.   The use of a standard cutting
interval and height throughout the year does not always
reflect farm management practice&semi; for instance, longer
intervals between grazing or cutting usually give higher
production rates.   In general, rates of production in Table
7.1 tend to be conservative.  
    Current and recent pasture DM production per ha may be
calculated on farms by using pasture mass estimates for a
particular paddock.   For example, 1000 kg post-grazing mass
on 1 September and 2000 kg pre-grazing mass on 21 September
give a mean daily pasture production rate of 50 kg.
  Set-stocked pastures require an estimate of animal intake
and change in pasture cover over a given period.   Pasture
production may then be calculated as cover on 21 September
(1500 kg) minus cover on 1 September (1000 kg) plus 20 ewe
hoggets per ha at 1.0 kg DM intake per day for 20 days (400
kg) = 45 kg/ha/day.   Such production rate information is
useful for current feed planning and will be valuable for
prediction in future seasons.  
    Published and local pasture production records from
previous years are used to give a first guess when predicting
likely production rates.   Current soil temperature and,
more importantly, current soil moisture reserves, long-term
weather cycles, and medium-term and current weather forecasts
should all be compared with the average weather values and
given due consideration when predicting pasture production.
  Extra fertilizer, particularly nitrogen, may give a boost,
while withholding normal applications could slow production.
  Use of different pasture cultivars can change the pattern
of seasonal production.  
        7.3.3 Feeding value of pasture      
    The effects of animal behaviour on diet quality
(animals selecting green leaf and rejecting dead material),
and the influence of the greater nutritive value of white
clover (legumes) than of ryegrass (grasses) on livestock
production are fully discussed in Chapter 8.   These factors
are sufficiently important that they should be considered by
livestock managers when assessing pastures for feed
planning.  
    When the proportion of dead material is over 25 per
cent of the total, only the green portion should be assessed
when estimating pasture mass.   Grazing stock prefer to
avoid dead material, which, if eaten, is of low nutritive
value (7-8 MJ ME/kg DM).   Grazing sheep attempt to select
the green leaf from among the dead material, so that when the
quantity of dead material is great the green material is less
accessible and animal intake is restricted.   Under heavy
mob-stocking, when hard grazing to low pasture mass is
possible, much dead herbage is eaten.   However, the intake
per head is low (although a lot of material is removed per ha)
and the nutritive value of the diet will be low.   In some
extensive grazing systems in which stocking rate is low, for
example in much of Australia, the only feed available to stock
during the dry hot summer is the dried, dead, surplus pasture
grown in spring.   In such systems graziers accept
live-weight loss in their stock and rely on this low quality
diet for livestock survival.  
        7.3.4 Livestock production      
    Measurement of livestock production is essential to
check that the objective of planned feeding is achieved.
  Livestock production can also be used to predict pasture
intake, pasture mass, or pasture production.   Minson and
McDonald (1987) developed a reliable relationship
(r  2   = 0.995) for use with steers for estimating
pasture DM intake (I) (kg/day) from live-weight (L) (kg) and
live-weight change (G) (kg/day):
  formula    
    Dairy cows require 21-28 kg DM for each kg of milkfat
annually, depending on breed and breeding index.   Similar
calculations can be derived for sheep&semi; the annual pasture DM
intake for a ewe of about 55 kg live-weight, weaning 105 per
cent of lambs, is about 500 kg.   In New Zealand this is the
basis of a stock unit for assessing land carrying capacity,
which in turn is an assessment of annual pasture
productivity.    
          7.4 Indirect measurement of
pasture mass        
    We have seen that assessment of pasture mass is
central to management of pastoral systems or any research on
pasture or grazing management.   However, difficulties arise
because of the variability of pastures within grazed areas,
due mainly to inherent soil fertility differences, effects of
topography (for example, sunny or shady aspect), or
modifications resulting from the activities of grazing
animals.   Increased pasture growth in urine and dung
patches and rejection of growth near dung creates a mosaic of
small areas of high pasture mass.   Larger-scale spatial
variation occurs with nutrient transfer to stock camps where
pasture production may be 50 per cent more than that in the
larger depleted area of a paddock.   Animal treading creates
tracks which on steep hills become strongly linear patterns of
terraces and banks.  
    The methods of determining pasture mass discussed in
this section are non-destructive and indirect, and many
readings are made to give a mean that needs to be related to
pasture mass (kg/ha DM).   These methods are used by
commercial farmers and researchers.   The cutting of swards
for pasture mass measurement is discussed in Section 7.5.  
        7.4.1 Visual assessment of pasture
mass      
    Visual assessment techniques are used widely and vary
from highly structured objective methods to a casual walk
across a paddock to gain an impression of pasture mass.
  With experience, skilled observers can estimate pasture
mass reliably.   Relatively inexperienced students can
quickly become proficient in visually ranking areas for
pasture mass, but regular calibration against data obtained by
cutting is essential if the results are to be expressed in
kg/ha DM.   Pasture height has a major influence on visual
assessment, but the observer must also assess and integrate
the effects of density, DM per cent, leaf:stem ratio, and
species composition.  
    Density (kg/ha/cm pasture height) is related to
species composition, and recalibration against cut data is
required when changing between sward types.   DM percentage
and leaf:stem ratio change with season and their influence is
most notable in the spring, when most experienced operators
need to refer to cut data for reliable visual estimates.
  Pasture mass is usually underestimated in pastures with
high DM per cent.   Dead material can influence pasture mass
estimates, as it usually has a high DM content.   Where
visual assessments are being made for livestock feeding, it is
advisable to disregard the dead material and estimate the
quantity of green DM.  
    In a more formal method of visual assessment (Haydock
and Shaw, 1975), a number of reference quadrats are selected
to represent the range in pasture mass to be encountered, and
are each assigned a score on a 1-10 scale in ascending order
of pasture mass.   The paddock or area is then assessed
visually in a systematic manner.   More than 20 observations
are made and a score assigned to each by comparison with the
reference quadrats.   Subsequently, the reference quadrats
are rescored and cut, and from this the mean observation is
converted to kg/ha DM.   This method has been used
successfully in a variety of experimental situations,
particularly where topography, sward variability, or the area
to be covered make other methods less appropriate.   Baars
and Dyson (1981) found that it was preferable to score a
number of small plots within paddocks rather than attempt to
assess whole paddocks.  
        7.4.2 Height      
    Sward height is used more widely in Australia and the
United Kingdom (Maxwell and Treacher, 1987) where continuous
grazing is more common than in New Zealand.   Sward height
has seldom been measured or reported for pastures in New
Zealand grazing studies.   This omission is unfortunate, as
pasture height is easily measured and can be used for planning
livestock feeding (Table 7.3).   However, some recent New
Zealand studies on dairy pastures (Piggot, 1986) and hill
country (Webby and Pengelly, 1986) have shown that sward
height and pasture mass are related closely, although these
relationships change with season (Figure 7.2).  
    When measuring height the top of the sward is
difficult to define.   Is it the height of the tallest
reproductive tiller?   If a ruler is placed into the sward,
should the highest contact point be recorded or should the
maximum height of the leaf or stem nearest the ruler be
recorded?   To overcome these problems, various instruments
have been developed for measuring pasture height.  
    Disc meters have a plate of about 0.1m  2   area
that is either forced up by the sward (rising plate) or
lowered into the pasture (weighted disc).   Sward height is
determined by the height at which the plate is supported by
the pasture.   These meters overcome the problem of
determining the top of the sward.   They are also sensitive
to the density of the pasture as well as its height, and
strong relationships between disc meter and pasture mass have
been demonstrated (Stockdale, 1984&semi; L'Huillier and Thomson,
1988).   These meters offer a useful, non-destructive,
rapid, indirect method for grazing managers to assess pasture
mass.   However, at some stage they require calibrating
against cut data, and have limited use on hill country or
pugged pastures with an uneven ground surface.   Another
disadvantage of height and disc measurements is that each
reading must be manually recorded.   Earle and McGowan
(1979) described a rising plate meter called the Ellinbank
Pasture Meter, which can automatically record up to 100
pasture measurements so that the mean plate height can be more
rapidly determined.  
    Sward sticks have been designed to allow sward height
to be measured more consistently and easily.   A sward stick
is about 1.8 m long, and has a central metal rod, calibrated
in cm at eye level, which moves freely inside a tube with a
small transparent perspex plate (about 20 cm  2  ) fixed
to its base.   Measurements are taken by placing the
calibrated rod vertically in the pasture and lowering the
perspex plate on to the pasture canopy until several leaves
are touching the plate.   The height of the leaf canopy can
then be recorded without having to kneel.  
        7.4.3 Capacitance meter      
    The most sophisticated method for fast and
non-destructive measurement of pasture mass is the single
probe capacitance meter.   This was developed in Australia
(Vickery   et al.  , 1980&semi; Vickery and Nicol, 1982) for
rapid field sampling of many positions in a paddock or
research plot.   It is, however, a sensitive instrument
which requires more care and understanding than the more
robust height and disc meters.  
    The basic principle of the capacitance method is that
air has a low, and pasture a high, dielectric constant.   A
pasture probe measures the change in capacitance resulting
from replacing air by pasture.   An air reading is,
therefore, necessary before each series of pasture readings.
  If atmospheric conditions are changing rapidly, then more
frequent air readings are required.   Each pasture
capacitance reading is subtracted from the capacitance value
in air to give corrected meter readings.   When the probe is
held vertically in pasture, the sensing zone is most
responsive to pasture in an area circumscribed 100 mm around
the probe.   Beyond this, sensitivity weakens up to an outer
limit of 300 mm.   Readings are recorded automatically, and
the latest New Zealand pasture probe may be programmed to
convert the mean reading for a paddock to pasture mass (kg/ha
DM) by using an equation appropriate to the pasture being
measured.  
    The modern single-probe capacitance meter evolved
after about 30 years of intensive development from the rather
large and cumbersome 'Charlie' capacitance meters, which had
an array of probes mounted on a rectangular frame (Neal and
Neal, 1973).   The earlier instruments were more responsive
to water in plant material than to DM.   They therefore
estimated fresh weight more reliably than dry and were
influenced greatly by free moisture on pasture.   Vickery
and his coworkers not only developed a light, portable
capacitance meter, but their sensing probe design was
responsive to changes in capacitance caused by changes in leaf
surface area rather than moisture content.  
    Capacitance meters are sensitive to electrical
interference and should not be used near high tension lines,
in electrical storms, or touching electric fences.   At
best, false readings will occur&semi; at worst, the probe may be
damaged.   The sensitive lower 300 mm of the probe must be
waxed regularly (every 50-100 readings in dry pasture) to
prevent a film of moisture adhering to the surface.   More
frequent treatment with silicone wax allows the probe to be
used in wet pasture.   Batteries must, of course, be kept
charged.  
        7.4.4 Selecting a method for pasture mass
measurement      
    The choice of method will depend on personal
preference, cost of equipment, time available, and access to
laboratory facilities such as a drying oven and an accurate
balance.   Accuracy of pasture mass estimation is less
likely to influence choice of method, as accepted techniques
usually have similar precision when used competently.
  Seasonal changes in the sward mean that all indirect
methods need regular calibration by comparison with cut data.
  Changes with time in pasture content of dead material and
reproductive tillers are the main reasons for variations in
calibration relationships.   There have been numerous
comparisons of indirect methods for assessing pasture mass
using the double sampling procedure (Section 7.5.2).
  Moderately good relationships have been derived between
pasture cutting and most of the indirect non-destructive
methods, but these relationships have been specific for
methods, time and place, pasture type, weather conditions, and
person cutting the pasture.   More general relationships
are, therefore, needed by both farmers and researchers so that
calibration cuts are required only when the character of
pastures changes with season.  
    Thomson (1986) expressed concern at the conflicting
opinion and range of advice farmers were receiving from the
'experts' on pasture mass assessment.   He concluded that
with occasional calibration, visual assessment is probably the
most reliable method for estimating pasture mass.   The
rising plate meter was not as reliable as visual estimates or
the pasture probe, which was the most accurate method if
calibrated regularly.   Thomson further concluded that a
rapid method for assessing pasture dead matter would help
select appropriate equations for the probe, so that regular
calibration would be unnecessary.   This suggestion was made
because dead material proportions are likely to vary between
years, seasons, and regions, with differences in climate, and
between farms or even within farms depending on grazing
management.   The five separate equations for pasture
growing seasons suggested by the pasture probe manufacturer
account in a general way for changes in pasture stem, density,
and dead matter proportions, but they need to be used
intelligently.   Many farmers may, however, be content with
a reliable estimate of green pasture mass because of the low
feeding value of dead material and the likelihood that animals
will avoid eating it.  
    L'Hullier and Thomson (1988) showed a large variation
in calibrations of indirect methods between and within
seasons.   Most of the variation was caused by dead matter
content.   However, a distinct seasonal pattern in the
slopes of calibration regression equations and smaller
variations in slopes within seasons were shown (Table 7.4).
  This evidence gave further support to the concept of five
'pasture seasons' proposed by the manufacturers with their
probe equations, and also demonstrated by Webby and Pengelly
(1986) when relating sward height to pasture mass on hill
country (Figure 7.2).  
  table 7.4  
    Pasture species, wet pasture, and variations in
cutting to ground level affect the use of general
relationships for all indirect methods to some extent.   The
manufacturers suggest a separate equation for the capacitance
probe when measuring pastures containing subtropical grasses
such as   Paspalum dilatum.   Lucerne, browntop,
cocksfoot, or prairie grass pastures certainly present
difficulties to observers who are accustomed to visual
assessments in ryegrass-white clover.   L'Huillier and
Thomson (1988) found that both probe and rising plate meter
readings were affected by early morning dew or rain in pasture
with a mass greater than 3000 kg/ha DM.   The use of a
separate calibration equation for wet pasture reduced this
error.   The likelihood that any method of pasture
assessment would ever consistently exceed correlations of
r  2   = 0.90 seems unlikely because of errors
associated with the calibration cuts themselves.   Smeaton
and Winn (1981) showed that the standard deviation due to
cutting on hill country pastures would usually have a value of
about +/- 200 kg/ha.   The potential percentage error in
direct measurement of low pasture mass (for example,
post-grazing mass on dairy farms) is, therefore, relatively
high, but is more acceptable in measurements of high
mass.    
  

          13.3 Factors affecting nutrient
availability and uptake by plants      
    The main purpose of this section is to describe in
general terms the factors which affect nutrient availability
in soil.   Those factors, or processes, which affect
specific nutrients alone and those which have already been
described in detail in previous chapters, e.g. cation
exchange, will not be considered here.  
        13.3.1 Soil parent material and degree of
soil development      
    The total amount of many nutrients present in the soil
is determined by the original mineral composition of the
parent material (see Chapter 2).   Greywacke sandstone, for
example, has a relatively low phosphorus content compared with
limestone or basalt, and indeed crops grown on soils derived
from greywacke normally require phosphorus fertilizer (see
Chapter 19).  
    The release of nutrients from the parent material
minerals, depends on the extent of weathering of the soil, as
described in Chapter 2.   Once released from within a
mineral structure, the individual nutrients can either be
taken up by plants or they can be leached from the soil.   A
 'recent' soil derived from unweathered parent material will
generally have a higher fertility than one which has
experienced intensive leaching over a long period of time.
However, a soil of an intermediate age will have a higher
organic matter content and a greater degree of mineral
decomposition than a recent soil.   This usually means that
nutrient release and cycling is more intensive in intermediate
aged soils than in recent soils.   The complex effects of
soil development on nutrient forms and availability are
particularly well illustrated in the case of phosphorus (see
Figure 15.4 and Section 15.3).  
        13.3.2 Soil reaction (pH)      
    Soil acidity and alkalinity have been discussed in
Chapter 12 and liming practices will be described in Chapter
19.   This section will describe the profound effect that
soil pH has on the availability of nutrients to plants and
micro-organisms.  
    The relationships between soil pH and plant
availability of each of the essential plant nutrients are
shown in Figure 13.4.   Basic macronutrient cations
(Ca  2+  , Mg  2+  , Na  +   and
K  +  ) are usually found only in low amounts in acid
soils (low pH) because they have been displaced from cation
exchange sites by H  +   and Al  3+   ions and
subsequently leached from the soil.   The rate of removal of
these cations normally exceeds their rate of release by
mineral weathering, and deficiencies therefore occur in acid
soils.   As indicated by Figure 13.4, these nutrients are
most readily available in neutral or alkaline soils.
  Micronutrient cations (Fe  2+  , Cu  2+  ,
Mn  2+   and Zn  2+  ) are highly soluble at low
pH, and in acid soils some of these nutrients can be present
at levels which are toxic to the plant.   In acid soils high
levels of soluble iron and manganese can reduce plant growth
directly or through their effects on the availability of other
nutrients, especially phosphorus.   The levels of these
nutrients can be reduced by applying lime, and in neutral
soils (pH 6-7) they are present in optimum amounts.   With
over-liming, or in soils with a naturally high pH (above 7),
these nutrients may become deficient, as indicated by Figure
13.4.   There is therefore a narrow range of pH tolerance
for these micronutrients and this is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 18.  
    The change in availability of molybdenum with pH is
opposite to that of most of the other micronutrients, being
least available at low pH and most available at high pH.
  The main reason for liming many New Zealand soils is to
increase the availability of Mo to clovers in order to
increase nitrogen fixation (Chapter 14).  
    The availability of boron is low in acid soils because
under these conditions it is highly soluble and readily
leached.   In soils with a high pH, boron can be fixed by
clay and other soil components making it most available under
neutral conditions.  
  Figure 13.4: Relationship between soil pH and the relative
availability of individual nutrients  
  caption  
    Although aluminium is not an essential nutrient it can
have a large effect on plant growth.   In neutral soils,
aluminium is normally adsorbed by clay minerals, in the form
Al(OH)  2+   or Al(OH)  2    +  , and is not
an important influence.   However, in acid soils, aluminium
(as Al  3+  ) is released into soil solution and when
present in high concentrations (c. 0.5 &mu;g ml  -
1   in solution) it can become toxic to the plant.
  Plant root development, particularly in lucerne, is very
sensitive to high levels of aluminium in the soil.  
    The availability of soil phosphorus is strongly
influenced by soil pH.   The form of phosphate ion present
in the soil changes with pH, as described in Chapter 15, and
the amount of reaction of phosphate with other soil components
also changes with pH.   Under acid conditions the presence
of high levels of soluble iron, aluminium and manganese leads
to the precipitation of insoluble phosphate compounds.   In
addition, phosphate can be 'fixed' by hydrous oxides of iron
and aluminium and by certain silicate clays, which can also
reduce its availability (see Chapter 15 for details).
  Phosphate availability is shown in Figure 13.4 to be at a
maximum between pH 6 and 7 but to decrease again above this
range.   In alkaline soils phosphate reacts with calcium to
form insoluble tri-calcium phosphate
(Ca  3  (PO  4  )  2  ) and this reduces its
availability to the plant.  
    Nitrogen availability is at its lowest in acid soils
and this is partly due to the
    inhibiton    inhibition     of nitrification
as a result of the low activity of some soil bacteria.
  Although nitrification and nitrogen fixation are
restricted at low pH, release of ammonium nitrogen from soil
organic matter can still continue due to the ability of many
fungi to operate unhindered in acid soil conditions.   Other
soil organisms, such as earthworms and actinomycetes, are
sensitive to acid conditions and prefer a neutral pH.  
    Plants differ in their ability to tolerate acid or
alkaline soil conditions.   The preferred soil pH ranges for
selected plants are given in Table 13.3 and show that many
agricultural and horticultural crops favour slightly acid
conditions whilst some, such as lucerne and asparagus, need
neutral conditions to flourish.  
  Table 13.3: Optimum pH ranges of selected plants  
        13.3.3 Soil oxidation-reduction
processes      
      Respiration   by plants and soil microbes
provides energy by breaking down available carbohydrate, such
as glucose.   The respiration process involves the oxidation
of carbohydrate and the release of electrons, as summarized by
the following equation:
  Equation (13.1): [general equation for
respiration]    
    As described by Equation 13.1 above, under aerobic
conditions oxygen acts as the terminal electron acceptor for
the respiratory process.   Under anaerobic conditions,
however, when no oxygen is present, other substances have to
act as the electron acceptor.   These substances are then
said to be  'reduced' since they gain electrons (or lose
oxygen).   In the   oxidation-reduction (redox)
reaction   described by Equation 13.1, glucose is said to
be 'oxidized' since it loses electrons (and hydrogen
ions).  
    The effects of soil aeration on plant and microbial
respiration were described in Chapter 8.   The level of
reducing conditions present in an anaerobic soil is measured
by the   redox potential   of the system.   This
is generally assessed by measuring the voltage difference
between a platinum electrode and a reference (calomel)
electrode placed in the soil.   The equilibrium redox
potential (E  h   volts) is defined as:
  Equation (13.2): [the Nernst equation]  
where E  o   is the standard redox potential for a
hydrogen electrode, R is the gas constant, T is absolute
temperature, n is valency, F is the Faraday constant, (Ox) is
the concentration of oxidized substances, and (Red) is the
concentration of reduced substances.   This equation shows
that the redox potential, or E  h   value, decreases as
the concentration of reduced substances increases relative to
the concentration of oxidized substances.   A low potential,
or E  h   value, indicates a reducing system (i.e.
excess electrons) whilst a high E  h   value indicates
an oxidizing system (i.e. a lack of electrons).   Aerobic
soils generally have E  h   values of between 0.4 and
0.6 volts.   Anaerobic soils have E  h   values
between 0.2 and -0.4 volts.  
    Under anaerobic conditions the reduction of substances
other than oxygen can lead to a change in their availability.
  The sequence of reactions which occur when changing from
an aerobic condition to an increasingly anaerobic condition is
given in Table 13.4.  
    Once a soil is waterlogged, oxygen is rapidly removed,
usually within 1 to 2 days, allowing the other reactions
listed in Table 13.4 to proceed.   Nitrate, Mn  4+  ,
Fe  3+   and SO  4    2-   will all
eventually be reduced.   The system is said to be 'poised'
or buffered by each reaction until that oxidant is exhausted
and a lower redox potential is achieved.  
    Nitrate (NO  3    -  ) which is reduced to
nitrite (NO  2    -  ) is unstable under anaerobic
conditions and tends to be further reduced to nitrogen gas
resulting in its loss from the soil (see Chapter 14).
  Sulphate (SO  4    2-  ) is reduced to
hydrogen sulphide (H  2  S) at only very low redox
potentials and therefore occurs only under severely
waterlogged conditions.   Manganese and iron both increase
in solubility in anaerobic soils and can be found in high or
even toxic levels (see Chapter 18).  
    Anaerobic respiration processes can cause the pH of
the soil to change.   The redox equations listed in Table
13.4 show that hydrogen (H  +  ) ions can be removed
from the system under anaerobic conditions, and in acid soils
this can cause the pH to rise.   In alkaline soils, however,
the build up of CO  2   from the respiration process
(Equation 13.1) has a dominating effect and the pH tends to
drop under anaerobic conditions.   Most flooded soils
eventually develop a neutral pH between 6.7 and 7.2.  
    These changes in soil pH can have a considerable
effect on the availability of some nutrients (see Section
13.3.2).
Phosphorus and molybdenum can increase in availability
whilst zinc tends to become less available under neutral
conditions.   Although copper and cobalt usually decrease in
availability at higher pH levels, under anaerobic conditions
the solubilization of iron and manganese compounds can result
in an overall increase in availability of copper and cobalt
(see Chapter 18).  
  Table 13.4: Order of utilisation of principal electron
acceptors and the measured potentials of these reactions  
        13.3.4 Soil salinity      
    Plant growth in New Zealand is rarely affected by
saline soil conditions but in many parts of the world it is a
serious problem.   Soils are classified as
  saline   when the electrical conductivity of a
saturated soil extract is greater than 4 mS cm  -1  .
  High salt levels can occur naturally in arid and semi-arid
areas, when the high evaporation rate causes capillary rise to
bring salts to the soil surface, either from underground salt
deposits or from saline groundwater.   Saline soils can also
be created by applying irrigation water which has a high salt
content (not usually a problem in New Zealand) or through the
use of high rates of fertilizer in greenhouses where leaching
does not occur but evaporation rates are high.   Saline
soils usually have a pH less than 8.5 but are often called
  white-alkali   soils because of the surface
accumulation of salts.  
    The excessive levels of sodium, calcium and
magnesium chlorides or sulphates, which are found in
saline soils, can reduce the osmotic water potential in the
soil and this can lower the amount of water which is readily
available to the plant (see Chapter 6).   Plants growing in
saline soils, therefore, often exhibit signs of drought and
may even suffer from   plasmolysis   (the removal of
water from plant cells resulting in their collapse).   Some
plants called   halophytes   are able to absorb high
levels of salt without damage, and as this lowers the plant
osmotic water potential it assists with water uptake.   The
order of tolerance of selected plants is given in Table 13.5
but it must be emphasized that the stage of growth is also
important.  
    Saline soils which have a high   exchangeable
sodium percentage   (ESP), representing over 13% of the
total cation exchange capacity, and a pH above 8.5 are called
  sodic   soils.   The high pH arises from the
hydrolysis of sodium carbonate (Equation 13.3), and can have a
large effect on the availability of plant nutrients (see
Section 13.3.2).  
  Equation (13.3): [hydrolysis of sodium carbonate]  
    Plant growth can also be reduced through the effects
of collapsed soil structure brought about by the high sodium
levels and the dissolution of organic matter at high pH.
  These soils are sometimes called
  black-alkali   soils, because the dark coloured
colloidal organic matter is often finely dispersed throughout
the soil profile.  
      Saline - sodic   soils represent an
intergrade between the two soils described above and have
    a    an     ESP greater than 13% but a pH less
than 8.5.   Plant growth is still affected by the high salt
levels and the loss of soil structure brought about by the
high sodium levels.    
        13.3.5 Quantity and intensity
(Q/I)      
    Nutrient availability strongly depends on the ability
of a soil to maintain a critical concentration of nutrient in
the soil solution.   A soil will be able to support
continued plant growth only if the nutrients removed from the
soil solution by the plant are rapidly replaced by the soil.
  The amount of available nutrient in the soil is termed the
  quantity   of nutrient (Q) and its concentration
in soil solution is termed the   intensity   of the
nutrient (I).   The quantity factor generally represents the
readily exchangeable nutrients, readily soluble nutrients and
other   labile   sources of nutrient.  
    The ability of the soil to maintain a constant level
of nutrient in solution depends on the   buffer
capacity   of the soil and reflects how the solution
concentration (I) changes with quantity (Q) as illustrated for
the different
  Table 13.5: Salt tolerance ratings of various crops  
soils in Figure 13.5.   Soil A has a high buffer capacity
and
despite removal of a certain amount of nutrient
(&DELTA;Q) shows only a small change in nutrient
concentration in solution (&DELTA;I).   Soil B has a
low buffer capacity and shows a large change in nutrient
concentration with the removal of the same amount of nutrient.
  The buffer capacity of the soil can be expressed as the
ratio of &DELTA;Q/&DELTA;I.   The higher the
ratio the greater the buffer capacity and the greater the
ability of the soil to maintain a continuous supply of
nutrient for plant growth.  
        13.3.6 Soil solution concentration,
diffusion and mass flow      
    The composition and concentration of the soil solution
is varied and depends on a number of soil properties, such as
parent material, fertilizer additions, pH, plant uptake, and
moisture content.   For example, acid soils generally have
lower nutrient concentrations than alkaline soils and dry
soils generally have higher concentrations than wet soils.
  A list of ion concentrations in soil solution is given in
Table 13.6.   Calcium and magnesium concentrations are
relatively high.   Nitrate concentrations can be very high
in some soils but are subject to rapid fluctuations due to
plant uptake, leaching and other soil processes.   Phosphate
concentrations are generally very low.  
    The composition of the soil solution and the
concentration of nutrients in solution can vary from one
location to another within the soil.   Concentration
gradients arise because of nutrient uptake by plant roots or
micro-organisms, or through nutrient addition in the form of
fertilizer or localized release from soil organic matter.  
  Figure 13.5: Quantity/Intensity (Q/I)
relationship[s]...  
      Diffusion   - Concentration gradients in
the soil tend to be reduced by the process of diffusion.
  This process was described in detail in Chapter 7 and is
an essential mechanism for providing a supply of nutrients to
the plant root.   As the plant absorbs nutrients from the
soil solution the local ion concentration around the root
decreases and a concentration gradient is created (see Figure
13.6).   According to   Fick 's Law  , which
describes diffusion, the larger the concentration gradient the
more rapid the rate of diffusion:
  Equation (13.4): [Fick 's 1st law]  
where   J    d   is the diffusive flux (mass
diffusing across a unit area per unit time),
  D    s   is the diffusion coefficient which
depends on the soil moisture content (&theta;), and
d  c  /d  x   is the concentration gradient.  
    The diffusion coefficient (  D    s  )
also depends on (i) the type of ion or solute, (ii) the
tortuosity of the diffusion pathway, and (iii) the adsorption/
desorption capacity of the soil.  
    Since most solutes must diffuse through water held in
soil pores it is easy to understand why an increased soil
moisture content can increase the diffusion rate.   In a
soil with a low water content, diffusion is reduced because of
the smaller number of pores filled with water and thus the
smaller area for diffusion.   The effect of tortuosity on
diffusion has been described in Chapter 8 but basically
represents whether the solute can take a straight or a winding
path through the soil.   Tortuosity depends on the moisture
content and the structure of the soil.   Adsorption and
desorption of solutes by soil particles can also affect the
rate of diffusion.  
  Figure 13.6: Nutrient concentration gradient around a
plant root  
      Mass flow   - When plant transpiration
rates are high, a relatively large amount of water will be
moving towards the roots.   This water can carry with it, by
mass flow, various amounts of nutrients.   The rate of
transport by mass flow, or convection, depends on the rate of
water flow and the concentration of the nutrient in the
solution (see Equation 7.11).   Nitrate, for example is
often present in high concentrations and the majority of the
nitrate taken up by the plant is transported by mass flow.
  Some ions, for example, Ca  2+   and Mg  2+  ,
are present in such high concentrations in soil solution
(Table 13.6) that mass flow can result in an accumulation of
these ions around the root if the rate of supply exceeds
demand of the plant.   Other ions which are present in low
concentrations, such as phosphate, cannot be supplied rapidly
enough by mass flow and therefore depend on diffusion as the
main mechanism of supply to plants.  
        13.3.7 Plant root growth and
morphology      
    The amount of water and nutrients which are available
to a plant are influenced by the depth and surface area of
rooting system which it can develop.   Although root growth
and morphology are genetically controlled, other factors, such
as climate, soil water content, soil aeration and soil
strength, also have an effect.   In addition, the
concentration of nutrients in the soil can influence the root
morphology.   High concentrations of some nutrients (e.g.
NO  3    -  ) can cause root growth to proliferate
whilst high levels of salts and other chemicals (e.g. ammonia)
can restrict root development.  
    The plant nutrient demand per unit root length is
normally highest in the early stages of plant growth.
  Eventually however, as a more extensive root system
develops, the total nutrient uptake potential of the root
system exceeds the plant demand.   Normally only part of the
root system is in contact with the soil solution yet the full
nutrient demand of the plant is able to be met by this small
proportion of the roots.   Root hairs are particularly
important because they increase the root surface area and the
amount of contact between the root and the soil.  
        13.3.8 Root
    rhizophere    rhizosphere    
effects      
    As roots grow through the soil they lose some of their
outer tissues.   This process, called  'sloughing off', and
another involving the direct exudation of organic material
into the soil, can provide a source of carbon for soil
micro-organisms to feed on.   During the growth of the
plant, over half of the total carbon translocated from the
leaves to the roots may be released into the soil through
these processes.   This can have a considerable effect on
the soil environment immediately around the root (a distance
of approximately 1-2 mm).   This zone, called the root
  rhizosphere  , has a large influence on the
availability of nutrients to the plant and can allow plants
  photos: colour plates (8 pages)  
  captions  
  Table 13.6: Average ion concentrations in the soil
solution of some New Zealand topsoils   
to obtain nutrients under normally deficient conditions.  
    The rhizosphere also contains a slime material called
  mucigel  , which covers the root and helps to
improve the contact between the root and the soil.   Mucigel
consists mostly of polysaccharides and other organic compounds
which bacteria and other micro-organisms can feed on.   The
microbial activity in the root rhizosphere is therefore far
greater than in the bulk soil and the availability and
turnover of plant nutrients is considerably higher.
  Free-living nitrogen fixing bacteria, for example, thrive
in the rhizosphere and may contribute large amounts of
available nitrogen to the plant.   Organic acids and
chelates produced in the
    rhizophere    rhizosphere     can help to
dissolve some nutrients and make them more available to the
plant.  
    The pH of the rhizosphere may be significantly
different to the pH of the bulk soil and this can also
influence the availability of nutrients, especially P, in the
immediate vicinity of the plant root (Section 13.3.2).
  When plants take up an excess of cations, such as
NH  4    +  , they excrete H  +   ions and
thus decrease the pH of the root rhizosphere.   When plants
take up an excess of anions, such as NO  3    -  ,
they excrete OH  -   ions which causes the rhizosphere
pH to rise.   The pH of the rhizosphere is thus strongly
related to the form of mineral nitrogen supply, and may be up
to one pH unit lower or higher than the bulk soil, depending
on whether the dominant form of N supply is as
NH  4    +   or NO  3    -  
respectively.  
        13.3.9 Mycorrhizae effects      
    Plant roots can develop a   symbiotic
association   with mycorrhizal fungi and this can be
particularly important for plant nutrition in low fertility
soils.   There are two groups of mycorrhizal fungi, both of
which assist the plant to obtain nutrients in return for their
supply of carbon from the root.  
    (i)   Ectotrophic mycorrhizae   live outside
the root cortex and form a sheath of fungal hyphae about 50
/&mu;m thick around the root.   This sheath increases
the surface area of the root and this, in addition to the
fungal hyphae 's ability to penetrate very small soil pores,
enhances the effectiveness of the root system.   The fungus
is also able to store nutrients, notably phosphorus, in its
tissues and can release this to the plant when soil nutrient
availability is low.   Ectotrophic mycorrhizae are
particularly important for increasing the amount of phosphorus
available to trees growing in low fertility forest soils.  
    (ii)   Endotrophic mycorrhizae   infect the
cells of the root cortex and form both an internal network of
hyphae as well as an external growth of hyphae.   The most
important type of fungal infection is called   vesicular
arbuscular   (V-A) mycorrhiza (Figure 13.7).   V-A
mycorrhizal infection of plant roots is particularly important
in low fertility soils where it can increase the amount of
phosphorus available to the plant.   The external hyphae
effectively increases the size of the root system and can
transfer phosphate from the bulk soil outside the immediate
vicinity of root.   Nitrogen fixation and micronutrient
nutrition are also increased by mycorrhizal infection of the
root.  
        13.3.10 Nutrient cycling      
    In undisturbed soil/plant communities, a large
proportion of the nutrients taken up by plants are eventually
returned to the soil as plant litter.   In this way,
nutrients can be recycled time and time again through the
soil/plant system.   Cycling of nutrients through the
vegetation helps to counteract the tendency of nutrients 
  Figure 13.7: Schematic diagram of the association of V-A
mycorrhizal fungi with a plant root  
to be leached from the soil in drainage water.   Deep-rooted
plants can bring up nutrients from considerable depths in the
soil and, in time, nutrients can become concentrated in the
surface horizons of the soil.  
    When the natural vegetation is removed to grow
agricultural crops, this process of nutrient cycling is
interrupted.   Nutrients are then removed from the soil
permanently in the form of crop and animal products.   Even
the most fertile soils cannot continue to lose nutrients in
this way indefinitely and, if agricultural production is to be
sustained, essential nutrients must be replaced by means of
fertilizers.  
    Nutrient losses are generally greater where arable
crops are grown compared to livestock production systems.
  In the latter, many of the nutrients taken up by pasture
plants and ingested by grazing animals are returned to the
soil in dung and urine.   Recycling of nutrients through the
animal is extremely important for the maintenance of soil
fertility of grazed pastures.  
    The effects of soil organic matter on nutrient storage
and release have been described in detail in Chapter 10, but
it is also emphasized here because in many soils the
availability of some nutrients, such as nitrogen, phosphorus
and sulphur, is strongly dependent on
mineralization/immobilization processes.   The rate of
release of nutrients from the organic pool is dependent on
such factors as soil temperature, water content, aeration, pH
and carbon content.  
    Leaching can have a major effect on nutrient cycling
and availability, even within a single growing season.   The
rate of leaching depends on the rate of water movement through
the soil and the concentration of the nutrient in the soil
solution (see Chapter 7 for a detailed discussion).
  Anionic forms of nutrients such as
NO  3    -   and SO  4    2-   are
mainly found in the soil solution and are therefore
particularly susceptible to leaching.   Cation nutrients,
such as K  +   and Mg  2+  , are less susceptible
to leaching because of cation exchange processes.
  Nevertheless, cations can still be lost from soil in
sufficiently large amounts to cause a nutrient deficiency in
some situations.    
  

        A REVISION OF ATTENUATION RELATIONSHIPS FOR
MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY IN NEW ZEALAND EARTHQUAKES    
    D.J. Dowrick    1      
    1     Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research, Lower Hutt, New Zealand (Member NZNSEE)
    
      SUMMARY    
      This study of attenuation of Modified Mercalli
intensity in New Zealand earthquakes used a carefully selected set
of isoseismal maps from 30 events with magnitudes ranging from
M  L   = 5.0 to M  S   = 7.8, and depths ranging from
very shallow to 65 km.   A completely revised set of magnitudes
was used.   A two-step stratified regression analysis was used to
evaluate the coefficients of the expression for intensity   formula  
where r is the mean slope radius corresponding to the distance from
the isoseismal to the centroid of the fault rupture surface.
  The resulting expressions model events of all depths very well,
and completely revise the attenuation curves of earlier work done
in the 1970 's in which depth was not taken into account.   The
earlier proposals for regional variations in attenuation were not
substantiated, the apparent differences for most of the country
being explained by the effects of depth and source mechanism rather
than path characteristics.   The attenuation character of the
Central Volcanic Region and Fiordland remain to be properly
established.   Attenuation of intensity in New Zealand was found
to be very similar to that for Turkey, the two regions being
dominated by strike-slip faulting.    
      1 INTRODUCTION    
    The subjective felt intensity scales remain a valuable,
indeed necessary, measure of strength of ground shaking in
earthquakes despite the growth in numbers of strong-motion
accelerographs in recent decades.   For many years it has been
the practice in New Zealand to use the Modified Mercalli (MM)
scale, slightly adapted in 1965 to suit New Zealand conditions as
described by Eiby
  [1,2]  .    references      
    The attenuation of MM intensity in New Zealand earthquakes
was investigated in the mid-1970 's by   Smith   [3,4]   and
less comprehensively by Walley   [5]  .
    references        reference  
     Some subsequent earthquakes have suggested that
Smith 's attenuation models needed to be reviewed, in particular
with specific examination of the effects of depth and source
mechanism, and a review of the magnitudes of the events in the data
set.   In recent years it had become obvious that the magnitudes
of New Zealand 's larger earthquakes needed to be re-assessed on a
consistent basis.   This necessary first step has recently been
completed using the surface-wave scale   [6,7]  .
    references       In addition the New
Zealand Seismological Observatory had revised the estimated local
magnitude M  L   for most of the events of interest since
1956, as reported elsewhere   [6]  .
    reference       Together these newly
available M  S   and M  L   values differ in all but
three cases from the values available to Smith.  
    The attenuation of intensity, I, may be expressed in the
following form 
  equation (1)  
where a, b, c, d are coefficients, M is magnitude, and r is the
mean radius (in km) of the isoseismal for intensity I.   Here r
is taken as the distance to the effective energy centre at
effective depth h  e   defined later.  
    Equation (1) is a form of expression previously used for
attenuation of intensity, eg   Ambraseys'   study   [8,
9]   of earthquakes in Turkey, or for the attenuation of peak
ground acceleration, a  max  , where log a  max   is
substituted for I, as in Joyner and Boore 's study   [10]  
of Californian ground motion recordings.
    references        reference  
    
      2 EVENTS STUDIED    
    For this study the basic data were selected isoseismal maps
of events for which instrumentally determined (ie 20th Century)
magnitudes were available.   The maps came from various sources,
ie NZ Seismological Observatory annual reports, papers on specific
earthquakes   [Refs 11-17]  , and unpublished maps prepared
by G A Eiby of the NZ Seismological Observatory.
    references       The isoseismals had to
be reasonably complete and be adequately supported by local
intensity observations.   At least four isoseismals per event
were desirable for establishing the shape of the attenuation curve
over as great a distance as possible. 
  Figure 1  
  caption  
  The mean radius &rmacron; for any given isoseismal was
found as the average of the radii along 16 points of the compass as
shown in Figure 1 in relation to the isoseismals for the 1968
Inangahua earthquake of M  s   = 7.4.   This map
illustrates the difficulty of determining reliable values of
&rmacron; for New Zealand earthquakes.   Because the land
mass is narrow, some of the isoseismals are incomplete on most
event maps.   Incomplete isoseismals were used only if the rest
of the map was complete enough for missing sectors of isoseismals
and the effective centre of the isoseismal pattern to be inferred
with reasonable confidence.   This meant that the inner
isoseismals had to be reasonably well determined over a sector of
the compass of at least 180&deg;.   In Figure 1 the
three inner isoseismals are complete and the general pattern
suggests an axis of
  Figure 2  
  caption  
approximate symmetry in the direction N40&deg;E (approx.).
  The missing eastern sections of the MM4 and MM5 isoseismals
were interpolated following the shape of isoseismals MM6 to MM10 as
shown.  
    These minimum requirements for using incomplete isoseismals
resulted in the rejection of most of those event maps where the
epicentre was offshore.   For example the earthquake of 27
December 1961 (Figure 2) had its centre obviously too far offshore
for determining half the isoseismal pattern.   The 10 May 1962
earthquake (Figure 3) was a marginal case, there presumably being
just under half of the isoseismals, as the epicentre (reasonably
well-determined) was just offshore from the relatively straight
coastline of the South Island.   Two other marginal cases were
the 30 January 1956 and 31 May 1977 earthquakes which were included
despite having offshore epicentres.   The reasons for their
inclusion are discussed later (see Central Volcanic Zone, Section
3.1).  
    The above selection criteria resulted in 30 events with
adequate isoseismal maps being chosen for the final regression
analyses, the epicentral locations being plotted on Figure 4.
  The main characteristics of these events are listed in Table 1,
where the magnitudes are seen to range from M  L   = 5.0 to
M  S   = 7.8.   Ideally the magnitude used in equation (1)
would be moment magnitude M  W  , but M  W   was
available for only seven of the 30 events.   Hence M  S  
or M  L   was used as shown in Table 1.   As discussed
elsewhere   [7]  , for shallow New Zealand events
M  S   is better     that    than    
M  L   as a measure of earthquake size for M
&gteq; 6.
    reference       In practice I have
adopted the larger of M  S   and M  L   where good
values of both were available.  
    We note that the isoseismals on the unpublished maps
(Events 1-10 in Table 1)
  Figure 3  
  caption  
  Figure 4  
  caption  
  Table 1  
have been derived by G A Eiby by converting maps originally
prepared in the Rossi-Forel intensity scale.   As such they are
slightly approximate MM isoseismals, so comparison was made of the
attenuation expressions obtained from Events 11-30 with those from
the entire data set.   No significant difference was found,
either visually from comparative plots of the regression
expressions or from the statistical t-test.  
    Because New Zealand earthquakes originate at widely varying
depths, so as to express attenuation in terms of a consistent
measure of travel path length, it was decided to base the
attenuation expression on distance from the centre of energy
release.   The depth of the latter is here termed the
  effective depth h  e  ,   which may be approximated
as the depth of the centroid of the rupture surface, defined
generally (for upwards rupturing faults) simply as
  equation (2)  
where h is the focal depth (from Table 1), and W  z   is the
width of the vertical projection of the rupture surface.   In a
few cases it was assumed that h  e   = h   [7]  .
    reference       Thus the radius r in
equation (1) becomes 
  equation (3)  
where r  h   is the horizontal distance in kilometres from
the isoseismal I to the centre of the isoseismal pattern.  
    The mean horizontal radii r  h   for all isoseismals
are given in Table 2, together with the preferred value of
    he    h  e       for the 30 events used in
the regression analyses.   The sources of the depths and
uncertainties have been further discussed elsewhere
  [7]  .     reference       It is
noted that the radius for MM10 for Event No. 3 given in Table 2 has
been revised to about half that on the existing map due to a review
of landslide evidence which had earlier been misinterpreted (G
Hancox et al, DSIR, Lower Hutt, pers. comm. 1990).   Values of
epicentral intensity I  o   were included for a few events,
where they could reasonably be inferred.   These extra data were
hoped to enrich the data set, but were found to have no substantive
effect on the results, although their inclusion was
preferred.    
      3 RESULTS 0F REGRESSION ANALYSES    
    As described elsewhere   [21]  , the coefficients
in equation (1) were evaluated using a two-step multiple regression
analysis of the type preferred by Joyner and Boore
  [22]  .
    reference        reference  
     Analyses were made of various selections of the
events described in Tables 1 and 2, examining the significance of
the following factors:
    &bullet; source mechanism 
  &bullet; regional variation 
  &bullet; depth.    
    The study of source mechanisms showed that the events
having Normal and Strike-slip fault mechanisms had no significant
difference in attenuation behaviour, but that events with reverse
fault mechanisms gave rise to intensities which were several
percent higher than those of Normal and Strike-slip events for the
same magnitude and distance.   This part of the study has been
described in detail elsewhere   [21]  , and produced the
following mean regression curves: 
  equation (4)  
  equation (5)  
    reference      
    These expressions were derived from data with magnitudes in
the range M  L   = 5 to M  S   = 7.8 and distances
r  h   &lteq; 500 km, and hence
should be used with caution near either end of these ranges.
  The significance of regional variation and depth are considered
in turn below.  
      3.1   Regional Variations in
Attenuation      
    The analyses of earthquakes in different parts of New
Zealand carried out earlier by Smith   [3,4]   suggested to
him that attenuation was different in three regions A, B and C
shown in Figure 4.     references    
  Recently he has proposed   [23]   a further subdivision
(not shown here) of the northern part of Region B which includes
the Central Volcanic Zone (CVR).
    reference       As mentioned earlier
Smith did not consider the depth or focal mechanism of the
earthquakes in his data set.   Let us now compare the attenuation
of the events located in Regions A and B, considering only Normal
and Strike-slip mechanisms which have been shown elsewhere
  [21]   to have virtually identical attenuation
expressions.    reference      
    For the regression analyses, for Zone A we use Events 7, 9,
14, 19, 25 and 30, which data set has a mean magnitude M = 6.3 and
a mean depth h  e   = 20 km, while for Zone B we use Events
7, 11, 13, 15 and 26 which data set has a mean magnitude M = 6.0
and mean depth h  e   = 17 km.   Using the t-test it was
found that   the   difference between the resulting attenuation
expressions for Zones A and B was not statistically
significant.  
    Now turning to Smith 's Region C, because it is in the
mountainous south-west corner of the country (Figure 4) the inner
isoseismals are poorly determined due to unpopulated mountainous
terrain, and the outer isoseismals are very incomplete.   Hence
only two Events (8 and 18) were found which had maps with four
isoseismals which satisfied the rules of adequacy described in
Section 2.0 (indeed Event No. 8 was only marginally acceptable).
  As two events do not enable us to obtain a regression
expression of adequate robustness, it was decided instead to
compare the data from these events with expressions derived from
appropriate events chosen from the rest of the data set.   As
Event No. 8 has depth h  e   = 60 km, it was compared with a
regression of a set of deeper events with depths 30
&lteq; h  e  
&lteq; 65 (ie, Events 7, 10, 13-16, 21),
and Event No. 18 has depth h  e   = 35 km so it was compared
with a set of events with depths 22
&lteq; h  e  
&lteq; 43 (ie, Events 7, 10, 13-15,
25).  
    In Figure 5 the mean regression curve drawn for (M = 7,
h  e   = 60) is compared with the I, r data points for Event
No. 8, and the curve for (M = 6.2, h  e   = 35) is compared
with the 
  Table 2  
  Table 2 cont.  
  Figure 5  
  caption  
I, r data points for Event No. 18.   The curves and data points
for both these events are obviously very similar.   The
isoseismal maps for both events also suggest that the epicentral
intensity (at say r  h   = 2 km) would be about MM7, again
the same as given by the regression curves.   (These two events
are also modelled well by equations (4) and (5) which are based on
larger data sets.)   Thus these two events suggest that the
attenuation in Region C is likely to be the same as the rest of the
country.   However, more evidence is required to enable firm
conclusions to be drawn.  
    Next we turn our attention to the Central Volcanic Region
in the North Island (Figure 4).   Here we again have few good
data.   Of the three events (Nos. 12, 28, 29) listed as CVR
events, No. 12 and No. 28 both have offshore epicentres so that the
isoseismal radii given in Table 2 are less certain than desired.
  As noted in Section 2 these two events were marginal for
adequacy, but were included in the hope that they might help give
some indication of attenuation rates in the CVR.   As noted in
Table 2 the isoseismal data for Event 12 has been supplemented by
including an estimated epicentral intensity
    Io    I  o       &approx; 9
at r  h   = 2 km in an attempt to improve the analysis.
  The Edgecumbe earthquake (Event 30) was a marginal fourth
contender for CVR membership, as it was located on its boundary.
  However it was excluded from the CVR and has been shown
elsewhere   [21]   to conform well to the attenuation
pattern of the rest of the
country.    reference      
    A regression analysis of the data from the three events
(12, 28, 29) was carried out, but gave unsatisfactory results, both
with and without the inclusion of the I  o   data point for
events 28 and 29.   So, as with Region C above, the I, r data of
the three events were compared with attenuation curves of
appropriate M and h  e   derived data from shallow N+SS
events from the rest of the country, equation (4).   The results
of this comparison were not very conclusive.   Event No. 28 data
points matched the model curve quite well while Event No. 29 data
points (the most reliable of the three events) indicated a more
rapid rate of attenuation than that given by the model curve
(Figure 6).   This difference in attenuation rate from the rest
of the country is likely to be due to anelastic attenuation, and is
of a similar value to that found earlier for the CVR by Haines
  [24]  .     reference       It is
clear however that more data is required before the intensity
attenuation rate in this region can be properly assessed.  
      3.2   Depth and Magnitude Effects      
    The effects of magnitude and depth changes on attenuation
are illustrated by plotting curves for events of two depths for
both M = 5 and M = 7.5, using the expression for N+SS events,
equation (4).   The increase in magnitude from M = 5 to M = 7.5
causes an increase in intensity of 3-4 units over the full distance
range shown on Figure 8.   We also see that an increase in depth
from h  e   = 8 to 45 km decreases the central intensity by
approximately 2 units from MM10 to MM8 for M = 7.5 events, denoting
a change from a strongly damaging to a modestly damaging event.  

  Figure 6  
  caption  
  Figure 7  
  caption  
  Figure 8  
  caption  
  Figure 9  
  caption  
    Figure 7 shows that an average shallow magnitude 5 event (N
or SS source mechanism) is at the lower limit of engineering
nterest, having a central intensity of only MM7.   If such an
event was of     he    h  e       = 30 km the
maximum intensity on average would be only MM5.  
      3.3   Comparison of Event Data with Regression
Curves      
    In Figure 8 we plot the isoseismal radii for the relatively
deep Strike-slip Event No. 16 with its appropriate mean curve for
M = 6.2 and h  e   = 50 km derived from equation (4). In this
example, we see that the model and the five data points match very
well, and note the maximum local intensity reported in this
earthquake was MM6 which also conforms with the central intensity
of the model.   As seen on Figure 4 this event was centred well
inland and the centre of the isoseismals was well determined.
  By contrast we will now consider the 1962 Westport earthquake
which had an offshore fault rupture (Figure 3) and was considered
to be only marginally acceptable for use in the regression analysis
(as discussed in Section 2). As seen in Figure 9 the outer four
isoseismal data points lie very close to the mean regression curve
for this reverse fault event derived from equation (5) using M =
5.9 and h  e   = 8 km, but the two inner isoseismals (MM6,
MM7) show moderate deviations from the mean line.   As may be
seen from Figure 3 these inner isoseismals are susceptible to
relatively large errors when estimating their mean radii, because
their "true" shape is known for perhaps only 100-120&deg;
of arc about the real but uncertain 
  Figure 10  
  caption  
centre (instead of the desired minimum of 180&deg;).  
    We now compare the isoseismal data for an event with
uncertain fault mechanism, ie, the 1976 Korakonui earthquake (Event
27) of M = 5.1 and h  e   = 3 km.   The earthquake was
thought equally likely to be of Reverse or Strike-slip fault
mechanism, so in Figure 10 we compare the appropriate mean curves
from equations (4) and (5) with the data points.   At the time of
its occurrence the intensities of this earthquake were thought to
be anomalously high   [14]  .
    reference       However, with the
benefit of our new attenuation relationships, it is evident from
Figure 10 that this would not be the case if the event had a
reverse fault mechanism.   We note that the isoseismal map
  [14]   had a small isoseismal for MM8 (of c. 5 km radius)
but which was very much off centre.
    reference       It was evidently a
local microzoning effect and not part of the main attenuation
pattern, and hence is not plotted in the figure.  
      3.4   Comparison of Attenuation in New Zealand
and Turkey      
    Turkey is a tectonic region which, like New Zealand, is
dominated by strike-slip faulting.   Ambraseys   [8,9]  
had studied the attenuation of intensity in Turkey for events with
focal depths &lteq; 15 km, using the same
form of expression used here.
    references       The Turkish intensity
data is in the MSK scale which conveniently is essentially directly
equivalent to the MMI scale.   Inverting   Ambraseys'  
equation (1) for Turkey   [8]   we have 
  equation (6)  
  Figure 11  
  caption  
    reference      
    As equation (6) includes events of all source
mechanisms, to obtain a quick and reasonably accurate comparison
with attenuation in New Zealand let us assume that one third of the
Turkish events were of predominantly reverse fault type.   The
New Zealand expression for this mixture of source mechanisms was
found (approximately) by merging equations (4) and (5) weighted 2/3
and 1/3 respectively, resulting in 
  equation (7)    
    Equations (6) and (7) should thus represent
reasonably comparable data bases from Turkey and New Zealand, and
attenuation curves for M = 5.5 and 7.0 with h  e   = 5 km are
plotted for both regions in Figure 11 (h  e   = 5 km
corresponds approximately to the mean effective depth of the focal
depth range for   Ambraseys'   Turkish data noted above).
  It is clear that Figure 11 shows that attenuation in New
Zealand and Turkey is very similar, which in view of the similar
geological regimes, gives mutual support to these two independent
studies.  
      4 ISOSEISMAL SHAPE    
    In the 1970 's Smith   [3,4]   examined the shapes
of the isoseismals which he approximated to ellipses, and found
values for the ratio a/b where a and b are the semi-diameters of
the major and minor axes respectively.
    references       He plotted the
geographical distribution of these ratios.   I have made a
preliminary examination of the isoseismal shapes and find that no
convincing systematic pattern may be readily described.   Further
study of this factor is proposed for a later date.  
      5 ESTIMATES OF MAGNITUDE FROM ISOSEISMAL
DATA    
    For early earthquakes for which no instrumental magnitude
is available, estimates of magnitude may be made if reasonable
isoseismal maps are available.   This is done simply by inverting
the appropriate attenuation expression such as equation (4) or (5)
above, and finding M  I   for the I,   r   pair of each
isoseismal, then finding the average M from all M  I  
available for the event concerned.  
    I have applied this procedure to two large 19th century
earthquakes for which isoseismal maps have been prepared.   These
were the Marlborough earthquake of 1848 October 16
  [25,26]   and the Wairarapa earthquake of 1855 January 23
  [27]  .
    references        reference  
     Taking the depth and source mechanism into
account my best estimates of the magnitude of these events are M
&approx; 7.9 and 8.4 respectively.   These values
are considerably greater than earlier magnitude estimates as shown
for comparison in Table 3.  
    Such estimates of the magnitudes of these two earthquakes
should be treated with caution, because (a) they are derived from
isoseismal maps based on sparse data in the early days of European
settlement of New Zealand, and (b) they involve extrapolation from
the magnitude range of the data on which equations (4) and (5) were
based.   Also given in Table 3 is the estimated moment magnitude
M  W   = 8.2 obtained from dislocation modelling studies
  [28]   of regional uplift during the 1855 Wairarapa
event.     reference       This estimate
also has to be treated with caution because of uncertainties in the
uplift data available from the early period.  
  Table 3  
        6 CONCLUSIONS    
    This study involved the use of a completely revised set of
magnitudes for all the events in the data base, and included
studies of the effects of depth, source mechanism and regional 
location.   The attenuation expression used was of the form
  equation  
where r is the slope distance from the isoseismal to a point below
the centre of the isoseismal pattern at the effective depth
h  e   of the centroid of the fault rupture surfaces.   The
conclusions reached were as follows:
1      The findings of this study completely revise the
results of earlier studies.    
2      Depth was shown to have a major influence on the
resulting attenuation expressions, which worked well for all events
in the data set which had events of effective depths h  e  
&lteq; 65 km.    
3      The comparison of attenuation in different
regions found no difference in the attenuation in Smith 's
  [3,4,23]   Regions A, B and D, while Smith 's Region C and
the Central Volcanic Region need more data before their attenuation
characteristics can be properly
established.    references        
4      The intensities of the 1976 Korakonui earthquake
do not appear to have been anomalously high as reported at the time.    
5      The attenuation of intensity in New Zealand was
found to be very similar to that of Turkey, the two regions being
dominated by strike-slip faulting.    
6      The attenuation expressions found in this study
may be inverted to estimate the magnitude of early earthquakes for
which instrumental magnitudes are unavailable.   Estimates made
in this way gave M &approx; 7.9 for the 1848
Marlborough earthquake and M &approx; 8.4 for the
1855 Wairarapa earthquake.   These estimates involve some
extrapolation from the data base, but are markedly larger than
previous estimates made in the same way.          
  

        ASSESSMENT OF SEISMIC HAZARD IN THE
WELLINGTON REGION, NEW ZEALAND    
  W J HASTIE and R J VAN DISSEN  *  
  Wellington Regional Council, Wellington, New Zealand
    *  DSIR Geology &amp; Geophysics, Lower Hutt, New
Zealand
    SUMMARY  
    The Wellington Regional Council and the New Zealand
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) have
jointly developed a multi-tiered approach for seismic hazard
assessment in the Wellington region.   The key components of
this investigation include an assessment of the fault
rupture, ground shaking, tsunami, liquefaction and lateral
spreading, landslip, and locally significant hazards within
the region.   Results to date from the tsunami and ground
shaking hazard assessment are presented.  
    This prescription for seismic hazard assessment,
though developed for the Wellington region, is applicable
to other areas throughout New Zealand, both on a regional and
site-specific scale.    
    INTRODUCTION  
    In a global tectonic context, New Zealand sits astride
the obliquely-convergent boundary between the Pacific and
Australian plates.   As a consequence, the country is cut
and deformed by many active faults and folds
  reference[12]  , and is not infrequently shaken by
moderate to large earthquakes   reference[15]  .
  Seismic hazards thus potentially pose a serious threat to
many districts throughout New Zealand.   The first step in
reducing the vulnerability    1     of the
community to this hazard is an assessment of the hazard
itself.    1   Following the terminology of
Crozier   reference[5]  ,   risk   is the
product of   natural hazard   and
  vulnerability.     Risk can be reduced either by
modifying the hazard event or by reducing the level of
vulnerability.     There are three essential
components for such an assessment   reference[10]  :
1) Likelihood of occurrence of an event that will cause
casualties, damage, or disruption&semi;
2) Location of effects on the ground&semi;
3) Estimated severity of the effects on the ground,
structures, or equipment.  
    In the lower part of the North Island, New Zealand,
regional planning functions are administered by the Wellington
Regional Council (Fig. 1).   The Council encompasses 8130
km  2   and a population of 400 000, of which 328 000
live in the Wellington, Hutt Valley, and Porirua areas.   An
important function of the Council is the identification and
reduction of the vulnerability of the community to natural
hazards, including seismic hazards.   As a means of carrying
out this function, the Council is preparing a Natural Disaster
Reduction Plan.   The plan aims to reduce the risk from
hazard events (earthquake, landslip, flooding, coastal
erosion) through a variety of measures including planning and
resource management, structural and operational activities,
public education and awareness, warning, and post disaster
response and recovery.  
    This paper outlines the approach taken by the
Wellington Regional Council and DSIR for the assessment of
seismic hazards in the Wellington region, and presents results
to date from the tsunami and ground shaking hazard
assessment.  
  Figure 1.  
  caption  
    SEISMIC HAZARD ASSESSMENT IN THE WELLINGTON REGION  
    Wellington Regional Council 's work on the seismic
hazard and vulnerability assessment commenced in 1988, and the
plan is due for completion in 1995.   The work has been
broken down into several components including fault rupture
and regional deformation, ground shaking, tsunami,
liquefaction and lateral spreading, landslip, and locally
significant hazards (Fig. 2).   Each hazard has a differing
effect and differing requirements for vulnerability reduction,
usually available through land use control (zoning), building
codes, and/or retrofit strengthening.   The assessments
are progressing for specific geographic sections of the
region, with a concentration on the more populated urban areas
where the risk is greatest.  
  Figure 2.  
  caption  
    Tsunami Hazard  
    The tsunami hazard to Wellington Harbour and
surrounding land is thought to be greatest for locally
generated events   reference[7]  .   This is supported
by historical observations.   Between 1849-1989, a total of
eight distant and local tsunami events have been experienced
in Wellington&semi; most of these have been non-damaging.   The
largest tsunami occurred in 1855 when a magnitude 8
earthquake on the Wairarapa fault caused seafloor displacement
within Cook Strait.   Large waves, 3.7 m in height, were
seen to enter Wellington Harbour, causing flooding of shops in
one of the main commercial areas of Wellington City.  
    Numerical models were used to estimate the size of
potential tsunamis generated in southern Cook Strait and
Wellington Harbour   reference[7]  .   The primary input
to the tsunami models came from dislocation models of the type
of earthquakes that are expected to cause deformation of the
seabed, and hence have the potential to generate a
tsunami.   The four earthquake scenarios
    modeled    modelled     were offshore rupture
of the Wairau, Ohariu, Wellington, and Wairarapa faults (Fig.
1).  
    Results from the modelling indicate that only one of
the events is likely to produce a damaging tsunami.   This
would be a repeat of the 1855 Wairarapa earthquake.   One
interesting finding was that in many cases the onset of wave
motion within Wellington Harbour occurs about 20 minutes after
the earthquake, with the maximum water elevations
occurring up to 2.5 hours after the earthquake.  
    The total area of land identified as susceptible to
tsunami is about 600 hectares (ha) (Fig. 3).   The major
land uses within this area are residential (132 ha),
recreation (107 ha), industrial (90 ha),
transport/communication (75 ha), commercial (74 ha), and
coastal margin (70 ha).   The areas most susceptible to
inundation are Lyall Bay, Evans Bay, Lambton Harbour, and the
Hutt River mouth (Fig. 3).   Many important commercial and
industrial centres are potentially at risk, with basements of
buildings being particularly prone to damage.  
  Figure 3.  
  caption  
    Ground Shaking Hazard  
    During damaging earthquakes impacting on the
Wellington region it is expected that there will be
significant spatial variations in the degree of earthquake
ground shaking.   Such variations have occurred in recent
large earthquakes affecting Mexico City, Leninakan, and the
San Francisco Bay Area, and are often correlated with local
geological ground conditions   reference[4,14,24]  .  
    A number of techniques have been employed to identify
and define the ground shaking hazard in the Wellington region.
  These include geological mapping
  reference[6,8,13,19]  , cone- and seismic-cone
penetrometer probing   reference[1,18,19]  , analysis of
strong motion earthquake records   reference[11,16,17]  ,
analysis of microearthquake recordings
  reference[20-23]  , numerical modelling
  reference[19]  , and surveys of earthquake damage and
felt intensities   reference[8,9]  .   It is
considered that no single technique can provide all the
answers, and that a higher degree of confidence in the results
can be achieved by using a variety of methods.  
    The 1974 DSIR microzoning study of Wellington city
identified three "hazard" zones (Fig. 4), based largely on
geological considerations, and spacial variations in damage
caused by a distant M 7 earthquake, and a local M 5.5
earthquake   reference[8]  .   The zones and their
expected response during seismic shaking are
summarised below:
  Zone1:    Basement rock less than 10 m from the
ground surface, except for the crush zone of the Wellington
fault.   No amplification of earthquake
motions.    
  Zone2:    Compact sediment, including weathered
gravels, fault crush zone, and completely weathered bedrock.
  Small amplification of earthquake
motions.    
  Zone3:    High porosity sediments (harbour
sediments).   Significant amplification of incident
earthquake motions.      
    At the time of the 1974 study, no strong motion
earthquake records were available.   Recently, strong motion
records from the two strongest earthquakes experienced in
central Wellington during the past two decades were analyzed
to determine the character of ground motion recorded on
various geological ground conditions   reference[17]  ,
and to test the validity of the 1974 microzonation.
  The findings of this study support the earlier zonation.
  Ratios of the 5% damped response spectra for individual
sites within Zone 3, compared to the average bedrock spectrum
(Zone 1), have amplifications of up to 
  Figure 4.   
  caption  
6 in the period band of 0.25-1 seconds.   The dominant
period of response for Zone 1 sites is at 0.1-0.25
seconds.  
    The focus of the 1990/91 DSIR work for the Wellington
Regional Council was the identification and quantification of
the earthquake ground shaking hazard in the Lower Hutt and
Porirua areas.   Four ground shaking hazard zones are
identified in the Lower Hutt area, and three in Porirua
  reference[25]   (Figs. 5 &amp; 6).   These hazard zones
are defined using geological, microseismic, and strong motion
inputs, and are graded from 1 to 5 based on their expected
response during an earthquake.   In general, areas within
Zone 5 are expected to experience the greatest amount of
shaking during an earthquake event, whereas areas within Zone
1 are expected to experience the least amount of shaking.
Descriptions of the geological materials that typify each
hazard zone are summarized below.  
  Zone 1:    Greywacke bedrock, including areas
overlain by less than 10 m of deeply weathered gravel and
loess, or well engineered fill.    
  Zone 2:    Alluvial gravel and fan alluvium&semi; fine
to coarse gravel, up to 200 m thick, with some beds and lenses
of finer grained sediment (sand, silt, clay, and peat) usually
less than 5 m thick.   The coarse sediments typically have
SPT values of N &gteq; 20.
  Also included is this zone are the
5-10 m thick windblown sands, and 10-20 m thick extremely weak
silty sandstones at Titahi Bay.    
  Zone 3-4:    Up to 15 m of fine grained sediment
(fine sand, silt, clay, and peat) within the top 20 m or so of
alluvial gravel, underlain by up to 250 m of alluvial gravel
and finer grained sediment.   The near-surface fine grained
sediments typically have SPT values of
N &lteq; 10-20, whereas the coarser consolidated
sediments generally have SPT values N &gteq; 20.    
  Zone 5:    Soft sediment (fine sand, silt, clay,
and peat), up to 10-40 m thick, at or very near the surface,
underlain by bedrock or a variable thickness of gravel and
other finer grained sediment.   SPT values for these soft
sediments are generally N &lteq; 10-20, and their shear wave
velocities at Lower Hutt, Wainuiomata, and Porirua are in the
order of 175 m/s, 90-150 m/s, and 110 m/s respectively
  reference[1,18,19]  .    
    Zone 5 areas in Porirua total approximately 460 ha,
including 50 ha commercial and 66 ha residential use, and are
characterized by a 10-20 m thickness of fine-grained
marine sediment underlain by bedrock or less than 10-30 m of
gravel.   The Zone 5 area in the southwestern part of Lower
Hutt totals 1142 ha (including 63 ha commercial, 87 ha
industrial, 661 ha residential), and corresponds to a
10-30 m thickness of fine-grained marine sediment underlain by
200-300 m of gravel and finer grained sediment.   Zone 5
areas in Wainuiomata correspond to a 10-40 m thickness of
fine-grained swamp and lacustrine sediment underlain by
bedrock or less than 30 m of gravel.  
    The Wellington Regional Council 's "Quakeline" survey
of the October 1990 Cape Palliser earthquakes resulted in over
700 felt intensity observations.   Felt Modified Mercalli
(MM) intensities in the Wellington region varied from MM I to
MM V.   There was a general rise in the average reported MM
intensity from Zone 1 to Zone 5.   The greatest number of MM
I reports occurred in Zone 1 areas, whereas the greatest
number of MM V reports came from Zone 5 areas
  reference[9]  .
  Figure 5.  
  caption  
  Figure 6.  
  caption    
    At the beginning of the seismic hazard study, it was
recognised that no single earthquake or zone of earthquake
sources adequately describes the range of ground shaking
hazard facing the region.   A large local event will
certainly be devastating, yet significant localized damage is
also expected from large, more frequent, distant earthquakes.
  The shaking response of each of the above zones is thus
assessed for two distinct earthquake scenarios.   Scenario 1
is for a large, distant, shallow (&lt;60 km)
earthquake that produces MM V-VI shaking intensities in
bedrock over the Wellington region.   An example of such an
event would be a M 7 earthquake centred about 100 km from the
study area.   In comparison with the 1989 Loma Prieta
earthquake, this scenario implies little damage to
structures founded on the best sites, yet significant damage
to certain structures on the worst.   Scenario 2 is for a
large earthquake centred on the proposed Wellington-Hutt
Valley segment of the Wellington fault that extends through
Wellington city and the Hutt Valley.   Rupture of this
segment has a mean recurrence interval of about 600 years, and
is expected to be associated with a c. M 7.5 earthquake at a
depth of less than 30 km.   Up to 5 m of right-lateral and 1
m of vertical displacement at the ground surface is expected
in this event   reference[2,26]  .  
    The expected shaking response of each hazard zone in
the Lower Hutt and Porirua areas is expressed as a suite of
ground motion parameters, comprising: expected MM intensity&semi;
peak horizontal ground acceleration&semi; duration of strong
shaking&semi; amplification of ground motion with respect to
bedrock, expressed as a Fourier spectral ratio (Fsr),
including the frequency range over which the greatest
amplification occurs&semi; and amplification of the 5% damped
acceleration response spectra relative to the peak at a
reference bedrock site (Table 1).   Van Dissen
  reference[25]  , and supporting DSIR reports
  reference[6,13,16,18,19,20,22]  , provide the
justification for the values listed in Table 1.  
    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  
    As results from the hazard assessment become available
they are placed on the Council 's geographic information
system.   This enables the hazard information to be overlain
with human occupation factors such as land use, population,
and building type to determine the risk to the community from
the hazard.   At the same time, investigations are underway
to develop risk reduction measures based on the Council 's role
in resource management and planning, advocating, advising,
researching and responding to seismic hazards.   Because
  implementation is the key to successful risk
reduction   the measures proposed for the Natural
Disaster Reduction Plan must balance the level of known risk
with the degree of mitigation they will achieve, the
feasibility of their implementation, their acceptability by
the community, and their cost.  
    Wellington Regional Council 's seismic hazard
assessment programme using DSIR as specialist technical
consultants has proved to be successful in identifying seismic
hazards within the region.   Work has been completed on
fault rupture   reference[3]  , tsunami, and ground
shaking hazards for parts of the region&semi; additional work is
planned to complete the hazard assessment by 1994.   The
hazard information and risk reduction measures will be
included in the Natural Disaster Reduction Plan due to be
completed in 1995.    
  

        INTRODUCTION    
    The orchid here named   Thelymitra tholiformis   has
had a confusing taxonomic history that is best explained by
reviewing past treatments of the associated taxa, namely,
  T. intermedia   Berggren and   T. aemula   Cheeseman,
in chronological sequence.  
    The name   T. intermedia   is based on plants
collected by Berggren in October 1874 from dry places in the Bay of
Islands in northern New Zealand.   Berggren found these plants
growing in association with   T. longifolia   Forster et G.
Forster and   T. ixioides   Sw.   His diagnosis reads:
    "T. caule strictiusculo, floribus roseis,
columnae apice trilobae lobo intermedio truncato-bifido margine
integerrimo lobulis acutis incurvatis, lobis lateralibus longe
porrectis apice penicillatis, antherae apiculo
exserto"     (Berggren 1878, p. 21).   In his
description Berggren comments on the similarity of   T.
intermedia  , with only four small flowers, to slender forms of
  T. longifolia   but with a column intermediate between that
species and   T. ixioides  , lacking the cucullate column of
the former and the spotted perianth and fimbriate or dentate
intermediate lobe of the latter.   As Moore later pointed out
(Moore &amp; Edgar 1970, p. 129), Berggren 's figures of the side and
front views of the column of his species (t.5, f.22,24) are highly
stylised, and therefore of limited diagnostic use.    
    In later accepting   T. intermedia   Cheeseman (1906,
1925) relied almost entirely on the original description, but
suggested that Berggren 's species may have been the same as   T.
pauciflora   R. Br., and this question could only be settled by
actual comparison of the types (Cheeseman 1906, p. 670).  
    In 1919 Cheeseman described   T. aemula   based on
material collected from   Leptospermum   scrub at Birkdale,
near Auckland, by H. B. Matthews (Cheeseman 1919, p. 94).
  Cheeseman 's diagnosis states:       "Species ad
  T. ixioides   proxime accedit, sed differt columnae lobis
lateralibus multo elongatis, et lobo mediano non
cristato."        
    Cheeseman defined   T. aemula   as a stout or slender
orchid with narrow-linear, thick, channelled leaves, and blue
flowers with a five-lobed column wing.   He further remarked:
    "It is doubtless very closely allied to   T.
ixioides   and the Australian   T. canaliculata  , but
appears to constantly differ in the lateral lobes of the column
being much longer, flattened, and more copiously penicillate&semi; and
the middle lobe, although denticulate at the top, is not at all
warted and crested at the back.   The flowers appear to be
invariably blue&semi; but the column is surrounded by a narrow band of
violet just below the lobes, above which the colour is bright
yellow"   (Cheeseman 1919, 1925)  .   No illustration was
provided.  
    Much later Hatch revised the New Zealand forms of
  Thelymitra   and, among other decisions, made the new
combination   T. longifolia   var.   intermedia  
(Berggren) Hatch (Hatch 1952, p. 397).   In so doing he adhered
largely to Berggren 's description and stressed the thin tufts of
white cilia (pl. 80, J), noting that   "Berggren 's
  intermedia   is so frequently mistaken for
  longifolia   that it seems better to include it as a
variety."    
    Hatch (1952, p. 393) also accepted Cheeseman 's   T.
aemula  , adding to the original description and selecting as
the lectotype AK 3364, Birkdale, 11. 1920,   H. B.
Matthews  , in the Auckland Institute and Museum Herbarium.  
    In preparation for the second volume of the "Flora of New
Zealand", Moore (1969) formally described several new orchid taxa
and discussed some associated species.   She regarded plants of
  T. intermedia   as   "having white cilia and a column
margin which inclines forward and is often jagged and inrolled
without being truly hooded"  &semi; a description that matches
some of the column features of   T. tholiformis   described
below.   Moore also reviewed the status of   T. aemula   at
length, pointing out that the figures labelled   T. aemula  
by Hatch (1952, pl. 78, J-M) represent different columns in which
the wing is not five-lobed.   These figures, based on drawings by
J. B. Irwin of specimens from the Waitakere Range, Auckland, in
fact represent the species here described as   T.
tholiformis  .   On the other hand, Hatch 's diagrammatic
sketch of a   Thelymitra   column (Hatch 1952, Pl. 81, H),
also labelled   T. aemula  , shows three of the five column
lobes and could be interpreted as   T. aemula   or, equally,
  T. ixioides  .   The sketch is not sufficient to make a
satisfactory determination either way.   Moore (1969, p. 480)
also emphasised that the lectotype chosen by Hatch (1952) for
  T. aemula   (AK 3364) was, like all the specimens now in
the Auckland Institute and Museum Herbarium 's T. F. Cheeseman
collection, collected after the species name had been published (14
May 1919) and therefore was not acceptable.   However, she did
not regard   T. aemula   as a distinct species and suggested
that the best course to take, on the information then available,
was to include plants with unspotted flowers, previously assigned
to   T. aemula  , under the older name   T.
ixioides  .  
    In Volume 2 of the "Flora of New Zealand" (Moore &amp; Edgar
1970), regarded as the modern reference point for New Zealand
orchids, Moore (p. 127) stated that   T. aemula  
  "seems likely to have been based on a form of   T.
ixioides   with unspotted fls."   and on p. 129 applied
the name   T. intermedia   to plants with flowers like those
illustrated in error under   T. aemula   by Hatch (1952, Pl.
75, J-M).   Her description of   T. intermedia  
encompasses many of the features exclusive to   T.
tholiformis   described below.  
    At this point plants now referred to   T.
tholiformis   had been included in   T. aemula   by Hatch
(1952), and in   T. intermedia   by Moore (1969) and Moore &amp;
Edgar (1970).   Neither treatment was correct and all three taxa
have been misunderstood by recent authors.  
      REINSTATED NAME    
        Thelymitra aemula     Cheeseman
  Trans. &amp; Proc. N.Z. Inst. 51  , 1919, 94.  
      Thelymitra aemula   is a distinctive orchid that
can be separated readily from other species of   Thelymitra  
by the characters furnished by Cheeseman (1919, P. 94) and
additional ones provided here.   It differs from New Zealand and
Australian plants of   T. ixioides   principally by its
robust growth habit&semi; thick, channelled, and ribbed leaf lacking the
basal retrorse glandular papillae of   T. ixioides  &semi;
prominent stem bracts with divergent tips&semi; uniformly unspotted
perianth (  T. ixioides   has both spotted and unspotted
forms)&semi; column structure (Fig. 1)&semi; consistent self-pollination
(Australian forms of   T. ixioides   are entomophilous&semi; New
Zealand forms are predominantly autogamous)&semi; and chromosome number
- in   T. aemula   2  n  =40 (CHR 461189), in   T.
ixioides   2  n  =28 (CHR 461190, N.Z., spotted form&semi; CHR
461192, Victoria, spotted form&semi; CHR 461191, Victoria, unspotted
form), (E. J. Beuzenberg and M. I. Dawson, pers. comm.).  
    Along with Cheeseman we regard   T. aemula   as a
distinct species and, in the absence of any unequivocal type
material, designate the following to serve as the nomenclatural
type:
  Neotype: CHR 289732, Glenfield, 14.11.1918,   H. B.
Matthews  , 547/3 in The Carse Herbarium, left-hand specimen
labelled a) (Fig. 2).   This collection of two plants is named
and annotated as   T. aemula   by H. B. Matthews, agrees well
with Cheeseman 's description, and was collected from the original
locality before the species name was published (14 May 1919).
  We cannot be certain that Cheeseman saw this collection when he
described   T. aemula  , but there is a strong expectation
that he did.   Matthews regularly sent Cheeseman collections of
orchids, especially those he regarded as new species.
  Cheeseman, in turn, acknowledged Matthews as the discoverer of
  T. aemula  , and at the time Matthews was collecting
representative specimens in the Birkdale-Glenfield area, both he
and Cheeseman lived in Remuera as near neighbours.   
  Fig. 1  
  Fig. 2  
    Distribution:   Thelymitra aemula   is presently
known to occur widely though locally from near Tauranga to North
Cape.   It is usually found in short, light, second-growth
vegetation on heavy clay soils formerly occupied by kauri
(  Agathis australis  (D. Don) Lindley in Loudon) and
associated forest species.   Roadsides, track margins, forest
edges, and gumland scrub with   Leptospermum scoparium  
Forster et G. Forster and   Kunzea ericoides   (A. Rich.) J.
Thompson are favoured habitats.   In places throughout its
range   T. aemula   coexists with   T. ixioides   which
has a much wider distribution in New Zealand, extending at least as
far south as Canterbury (CHR 212439), though somewhat sparingly.
  It is likely that   T. aemula   will be found in other
parts of the "kauri zone", if not further afield.  
    Despite its robust growth habit,   T. aemula   has
small root-stem tuberoids and is difficult to maintain in
cultivation.   This trait, along with its relative paucity in the
wild, suggests a strong reliance on continued mycorrhizal
infection, perhaps by a specific symbiont.   
  Fig. 3  
    Conservation status: The category "Local" (Given 1981)
seems an appropriate conservation rating for   T. aemula  ,
based on the present knowledge of its distribution and
abundance.  
      TYPIFICATION OF   T. INTERMEDIA      
        Thelymitra intermedia     Berggren
  Minneskr. Fysiogr. Sallsk. Lund Art. 8  , 1878, 21.  
    Lectotype (here designated): LD 2562,   S. Berggren
s.n.  ,   "Bay of Islands Ins. boreal Novae
Zelandiae"  , Oct 1874! (Fig. 3).   This is the only sheet
in LD representing Berggren 's species and is annotated by a curator
  "Orig.!"  .   However, there may have been more
specimens that were subsequently distributed by a curator, or by
Berggren himself.  
    The envelope attached to the sheet contains light pencil
sketches and notes by Berggren.   One sketch (Fig. 3, left) is
labelled "Thel. longifolia", the other "Ny art." (New species).
  There is a close similarity between the latter and Berggren 's
published figure showing the same side view of the column of
  T. 
  Fig. 4  
intermedia   (Berggren 1878, t. 5, f. 22).   Berggren 's notes
over "Th. intermedia" translate thus:     "unites in form
of columna characters of   Th. longifolia   and
  ixioides  , together with which it grows.   Differs from
  longifolia   by apex of col. not cucullate [?, literally
"kapuchon"-like] (though somewhat arched), deeply cleft, obliquely
truncate, appendices long straight, overtopping, hair-pencil
crista-like but penicillate (straight tuft at apex)"    .
  (Per Lassen pers. comm., with his comments in square brackets).
  In the same envelope is a small packet containing a dried
anther and column arm, labelled "Thelym. intermedia
  anthera   and   appendik  ".  
    Berggren 's type consists of a single flowering plant 3Ocm
tall with roots and two root-stem tuberoids attached&semi; the older one
(Fig. 3, lower left) supporting the flower stem.   Soil particles
still adhering to the roots and tuberoids contain a high percentage
of clean silica grains in a pale grey silty-clay matrix, consistent
with the strongly leached E horizon of a podzolised soil, probably
developed under kauri and associated species.   The specimen has
a pale, truncated basal sheath&semi; a solitary leaf&semi; a slender stem
with three, distant, clasping bracts&semi; and a small, slender
inflorescence with four, shortly-pedicellate flower buds (Fig. 3,
note linear scale).   At the time the specimen was collected, the
first bud had completed anthesis&semi; the one above this was about to
open&semi; and the next two were immature with the uppermost the least
developed.   This sequence is in keeping with the behaviour of an
autogamous orchid.  
    The type specimen is almost identical to that figured
by Berggren (1878, t. 5, f. 21) which was probably based on
fresh material.   However, whereas the leaf in Berggren 's figure
is sub-erect, clean, and normal-looking, that of the type
material is heavily infected with rust and markedly distorted.
  A small scraping of sori yielded teleutospores and
uredospores of   Uromyces thelymitrae   McAlpine (M. G.
Cromey, pers. comm.).   This rust is common throughout New
Zealand and recorded hosts include   thelymitra longifolia,
T. pauciflora, T. pulchella, Prasophyllum pumilum  
(Pennycook 1989), and   Thelymitra carnea  .   Because
of the rust infection it is difficult to construct a meaningful
description of the leaf, except to say that it is incomplete (11 cm
long), narrow, and keeled.  
    Although the specimen is 115 years old, the stem and
particularly the stem bracts have an unmistakable 
  Fig.5  
reddish tinge.   The upper part of the stem and the inflorescence
are much darker, but the original colours of the two advanced
flowers have faded completely.   The tips and outer ribs (veins)
of all bracts support minute, triangular papillae.  
    To determine the structure of the flowers the second bud
(Fig. 3, arrowed) was removed, at first softened in detergent and
water, and finally restored in NaOH.   After each treatment the
flower was examined, photographed, and sketched whilst submerged in
fresh water.   The chief features of the flower are as follows
(Fig. 4): Perianth 6 mm long, without stripes or spots&semi; sepals,
petals, and labellum similar, elliptic, subacute.   Column short,
erect&semi; column arms &plusmn; terete, suberect&semi; hair tufts or
cilia ?white, sparse, &plusmn; straight, projecting above
post-anther     lob e    lobe    &semi; post-anther lobe
barely overtopping anther apex, dark above the middle, deeply
cleft, margins smoothly inturned with two small inturned horns in
front.   Anther erect, apex sharply pointed&semi; pollinia in two
pairs with monad pollen&semi; stigma short, broad, &plusmn; concave,
bilobed above&semi; rostellum not seen.   As the specimen was
collected in October, and had begun to flower, it represents an
early flowering species.  
    To summarise, the essential features of Berggren 's type
material agree with his description.   These same features,
together with additional ones cited above, are all characters
described for   Thelymitra pauciflora   (cf. Fig. 4, 5), thus
confirming Cheeseman 's suspicion (Cheeseman 1906, p. 670) that the
two are conspecific.   Thus,   T. intermedia   becomes a
synonym of the earlier   T. pauciflora  .  
    This leaves the species mistakenly assigned to   T.
intermedia   by Moore (Moore &amp; Edgar 1970, p. 129) without a
name.   This species is described below as   T.
tholiformis  .  
        DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPECIES      
          Thelymitra tholiformis     Molloy et
Hatch sp. nov.    
            T. aemula  
subsimilis.   Lobus medius collimnae haud cucullatus,
tholiformis, vividi-flavus, margines supra denticulati.   Lobi
antici absentes.   Cilia loborum lateralium, alba densa
caespitosa.        
    Holotypus: CHR 461356, Dangens Road, nr. Oruru, Northland,
ridge crest roadcut at 152 m, margin of second growth
conifer/hardwood forest,   B. P. J. Molloy and D. P.
McCrae  , 31 October 1988 (Fig. 6).  
    Description: Plant at flowering up to 60 cm tall, usually
less.   Leaf solitary, up to 36 x 1.5 cm, linear-lanceolate,
sub-erect, shallow-concave with exterior ridges on mature plants,
usually green, often with  reddish margins and base.   Stem
slender to moderately robust, blue-green&semi; basal sheath up to 30 mm
long, pale, truncate, mucronate&semi; stem bracts usually 2, 20-90 x 3-6
mm, lanceolate, sheathing in basal half to two thirds, occasionally
with a third leaf-like bract at base up to 150 mm long.   Floral
bracts 10-20 X 3-6 mm, lanceolate.   Flowers 1-15, 10-15 mm
diameter, pale to strong mauve, on short pedicels.   Ovary
slender, oblanceolate, terete, 5-10 x 3-5 mm.   Perianth cupped,
parts ovate, apiculate, up to 12 x 5 mm&semi; sepals narrower than
petals&semi; petals minutely papillate externally.   Column up to 5 mm
tall, erect, concave in side view, pale purple with yellow striae 
  Fig. 6  
and a narrow purple band near the top.   Post-anther lobe as high
or exceeding the anther, tholiform, not cucullate, bright yellow,
margin irregularly denticulate.   Column arms &plusmn; terete,
horizontal or upturned, with short, dense, globose tufts of white
cilia.   Anther erect, apex usually pointed, sometimes curved
forward&semi; pollinia white, in two pairs, friable, with monad pollen.
  Stigma short, broad, &plusmn; concave, bilobed above&semi;
rostellum orbicular, very prominent (Fig. 1).   Capsule 10-15 x
5-7 mm, elliptic, green.  
      Distribution: Northern New Zealand&semi; from the Waita-
kere Range, Auckland, to North Cape.   Endemic.  
    Habitat: Gumland scrub and second growth conifer/ hardwood
forest on podzolised soils formed under kauri and associated
species.  
    Flowering: October to February&semi; seldom more than two or
three flowers open at the same time on any one plant.   Flowers
open tardily.  
    Pollination: Predominantly self-pollinating (auto-
gamous).  
    Chromosome number: 2  n  =66, CHR 461278, 461279 (E.
J. Beuzenberg and M. I. Dawson, pers. comm.).  

    Affinities: Previously confused with   T. aemula  ,
but a more slender species with a distinctive dome-shaped
post-anther lobe with a bright yellow, irregularly denticulate
margin.   Also differs from   T. aemula   in chromosome
number.  
    Conservation status: Widespread but very local&semi; the
category "Rare" (Given 1981) seems appropriate on the basis of
present knowledge.  
    Etymology: The epithet   tholiformis  , dome-shaped,
refers to the post-anther lobe.  
    Other specimens: CHR 461358, Taumatarea, Waitakere Range,
Auckland, bare gum clay, 91 m,   E. D. Hatch  , 8.11.1987&semi;
CHR 461357, Kaitarakihi Park, Waitakere Range, Auckland, bare gum
clay, 121 m,   E. D. Hatch  , 10.11.1987&semi; CHR 461359, Farley
Track, Huia, Waitakere Range, Auckland, bare gum clay, 213 m,
  E. D. Hatch  , 11.11.1987&semi; CHR 461360 A-B, Powerline Track,
Parau, Waitakere Range, Auckland, on gum clay, 152 m,   E. D.
Hatch  , 12.11.1987.      
  

          INTRODUCTION      
    Most pastures in New Zealand require fertiliser phosphorus
(P) to compensate for P losses during grazing and they also respond
to nitrogen (N) fertiliser especially in spring and autumn.
  Potassium fertiliser (K) is required to compensate for K losses
during grazing by dairy cattle on most soils and for sheep grazing
on soils such as gley podzols, yellow brown pumices and loams, and
some yellow-brown earths.  
    The contribution of these nutrients in excreta to the soil
nutrient pool and hence to pasture growth depends on the spatial
distribution of excreta, the rate of the nutrient returned, and the
recovery of that nutrient by the pasture.   Research on the
spatial distribution of excreta has been undertaken for cattle
(Peterson et al. 1956&semi; Richards &amp; Wolton 1976) and for sheep
(Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi; Donald &amp; Leslie 1969&semi; Thorrold et al. 1985).
  If the spatial distribution of excreta results in a significant
proportion of the pasture being affected then fertiliser
requirements may be reduced accordingly.  
    The reported trial investigated the spatial distribution of
sheep excreta from three practical aspects.
  1. The effect of stocking density on the spatial distribution
of excreta. 
  2. The effects of grazing method, i.e., comparing grazing
durations of four periods of 1 day compared with one period of 4
days.
  3. The carry-over effect of autumn-applied N on pasture yield
after the first grazing, resulting from the return of dung and
urine N.  
        MATERIALS AND METHODS      
        Site      
    The trial was sited on an Okarito gley podzol at Coal
Creek, 8 km east of Greymouth.   This soil type is poorly drained
because of impeded drainage and has been described by Mew (1980).
  The pasture, originally sown in 1982, consisted of 'Grasslands
Ruanui' ryegrass (  Lolium perenne   L.), 'Grasslands Huia'
white clover (  Trifolium repens   L.), Yorkshire fog
(  Holcus lanatus   L.), and Lotus major (  Lotus
pedunculatus   L.).  
    The site was spelled for 3 months to reduce the effect of
residual urine patches from previous grazings, and then mown in
late March 1985 to give an even pasture cover.   In the second
year of the trial (1986), the site was spelled from grazing for 2
months before the trial started.  
        Trial design      
    The 1 ha area was divided into five blocks each of 0.19 ha
providing a run-in area and four replicates.   Each of the four
replicates was divided into six 0.027 ha plots.   To fit into the
restricted site area, the first five plots in each replicate were
30 x 9 m and the last one was 27 x 10 m.   Along the end of the
four replicates, there was one larger plot of 0.108 ha.   The
  Table 1 Treatments randomly allocated to the six plots in each
replicate plus seventh treatment on larger plot.  
first three replicates were on flat ground and the fourth was on an
even slope.  
    The treatments randomly allocated to the six plots in each
replicate plus the seventh treatment situated on the larger plot
are shown in Table 1.   The stocking densities are rounded-off
for simpler expression.   A lower stocking density was used in
October 1985 and October 1986 because less pasture was available
for grazing.  
    Nitrogen was applied as urea to Treatments 2 and 6 on 1
April 1985 and 1986.   From earlier research where N was applied
in early April on the West Coast, Williams &amp; Paterson (1983) showed
that 25 kg N/ha resulted in a higher efficiency of N use than 50 kg
N/ha so the rate of application was reduced in the second year.
  The plots were separately fenced using temporary electric
fencing and grazed  by mixed-age Perendale ewes from 10 to 15 June
and 14 to 18 October 1985, and from 16 to 20 June and 13 to 17
October 1986.   After a 1-day grazing of the run-in area, the
sheep grazed each replicate of Treatments 1-6 for 1 day, whereas
for Treatment 7, the sheep spent 4 days in the larger plot.  
        Assessments      
    Pasture herbage mass was measured before N was applied
(Treatments 1, 2, 5, and 6) and before and after each grazing.
  A rising plate meter (Holmes 1974) was used to indirectly
measure pasture mass at 2O sites within each plot.   At the mean
reading and also at +/- 1.2 SD units of the mean reading, pasture
within a 2O x 2O cm quadrat was cut to ground-level, oven-dried for
24 h at 90&deg;C, and weighed.  
    After each 4-day grazing period, each plot was divided into
60 quadrats, 2 x 2 m squares, using string, and the number of newly
deposited discernible dung patches was counted in each square.
  At any one measurement date, the dung patches consisted of
either soft deposits of faeces which were easily identified as a
single dung patch, or as discretely formed hard pellets, often
scattered.   In the latter situation, all pellets with a 200
cm  2   area were arbitrarily counted as one dung patch.
  The area covered by 20 dung patches in Treatments 1, 2, and 6
in the fourth replicate was measured in June 1985 and the dung
chemically analysed.   The concentration of N was measured using
the semi micro-Kjeldahl digestion (Bremner 1965).   To measure P
concentration the dung was digested with nitric acid and perchloric
acid and the digest was analysed using the molybdenum blue method
(Blakemore et al. 1972).   K concentration was measured using the
same digestion as P followed by analysis using atomic absorption
spectrophotometry.   In October 1985 the area of 10 urine patches
was also measured.   The eight ewes in Treatment 1 were dosed on
three consecutive mornings with 10 ml each of a 1% sodium
fluorescin solution.   On the night of the fourth day urine
patches containing this chemical were identified using an
ultra-violet lamp operated off a generator.   The urine patches
were marked and the area measured   the   next day.  
        Statistical analysis      
        Distribution of quadrat counts      
    The collection of the spatial distribution data for a plot
(i.e., the exact position of each dung patch) was impractical and
so counts of dung patches in 2 x 2 m quadrats were taken.   The
counts from the quadrats are independent observations of the
spatial process which generated the resulting spatial distribution
of the dung patches over the plot.   The distribution of the
counts will reflect some attributes of the spatial process,
although the complete nature of the spatial process cannot be
deduced from the quadrat counts.   For example, many distinct
spatial processes are known to give rise to a negative binomial
distribution for the quadrat counts.   In particular the counts
will still contain complete information on the mean density of dung
deposition over the plot and will capture most of the information
on the degree of aggregation of dung patches in the plot.  
    The degree of aggregation of dung patches was an attribute
of particular interest in this trial.   Fig. 1 shows three
spatial distributions which show varying degrees of
aggregation.  
    Fig. 1(A) shows a spatial distribution that has been
generated by a regular spatial process which distributes objects
evenly over the plot.   Fig. 1(B) shows a spatial distribution
generated by a completely random spatial process (i.e., the
positioning of any object is independent of all other objects and
all positions have an equal probability of being chosen).   When
a spatial process is completely random, the quadrat counts will
follow a Poisson distribution.   Fig. 1(C) shows a spatial
distribution generated by a clustered or aggregated spatial
process.   The negative binomial has been traditionally used in
analyses where the objects to be counted are clumped or aggregated
together (Anscombe 1949&semi; Skellam 1952&semi; Bliss &amp; Fisher 1953&semi;
Peterson et al. 1956&semi; Bliss &amp; Owen 1958&semi; Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi;
Donald &amp; Leslie 1969&semi; McCaughran &amp; Arnold 1976).  
  Figure 1A, B, C  
    A variety of distributions were fitted to the counts of
dung patches in the 60 quadrats per plot by the method of maximum
likelihood using the statistical package, Maximum Likelihood
Program Version 3.07 (MLP).   The seven distributions which could
be fitted to this data using MLP were the Poisson, geometric, log
series, negative binomial, Neyman Type A, Polya-Aeppli, and Poisson
lognormal distributions.   The definition of these distributions
can be found in the MLP manual (Ross 1982).   The first three
distributions have only one defining parameter and are all special
uses of the negative binomial distribution.   The last four
distributions have two defining parameters and allow for varying
degrees of aggregation of the counted objects.  
    On fitting the seven distributions to the 112 (seven
treatments x four reps at four dates  ) sets of quadrat
counts, it was found that there was significant lack of fit at the
5% level in over 70% of the analyses for the single parameter
distributions, in 21% of the analyses for the Poisson lognormal
distribution, and in 13% of the analyses for the other three
distributions.   The three distributions, negative binomial,
Polya-Aeppli, and Neyman Type A, were equivalent in their ability
to fit the observed distributions, as measured by the Chi-square
goodness of fit test taken over all situations.   The negative
binomial distribution was chosen to represent the data since it is
the simplest of the three distributions and it is the distribution
that has been used in previous work on this topic (Peterson et al.
1956&semi; Tallis &amp; Donald 1964&semi; Donald &amp; Leslie 1969).  
        Negative binomial distribution      
    The negative binomial distribution can be expressed in a
variety of forms&semi; see, for example, Bliss &amp; Fisher (1953), Bliss &amp;
Owen (1958), and Johnson &amp; Kotz (1969).   The most convenient
form of expressing the probability distribution function of the
negative binomial is that proposed by Bliss &amp; Owen (1958) and used
by Barnwall &amp; Paul (1988), in which the random variable   X  
follows a negative binomial distribution with mean   m   and
dispersion parameter   c  , if
  formula (1)  
for   x   = 0,1,... &infinity;, 0 &lt;
  m   &lt; &infinity;, 0 &lt;
  c   &lt; &infinity; and where
&GAMMA;(  x  ) is the Gamma function.   The variance
of the distribution,   V  , is found from the formula:
  formula (2)  
and so   c   accounts for variance over and above
  m  , the variance of the Poisson distribution with mean
  m  .  
    The negative binomial distribution has the property that
the dispersion parameter   c   is invariant under random
thinning, i.e., if objects are removed at random from the area
being counted then the estimated value of   c   does not
change.   Thus maximum likelihood estimates of   m  
and   c   are independent and so this allows an independent
interpretation of these two parameters.  
    The mean,   m  , is a measure of the average number
of dung patches in a 4 m  2   area.   The parameter
  c   is known as the Poisson Index and is a measure of
aggregation or clumping of the dung patches.   The negative
binomial distribution has the property that its variance must be
greater than its mean.   As the variance tends towards the mean
(i.e.,   c   tends to zero), the negative binomial tends
towards the Poisson distribution and in the particular samples
where the mean exactly equalled the variance, the Poisson
distribution was fitted and so   c   = 0.   If the Poisson
Index is equal to 0 then the dung patches are randomly distributed&semi;
if it is positive then the dung patches tend to be aggregated
together, leaving some areas with high densities of dung patches
and other areas with very few dung patches (Bliss &amp; Fisher 1953).
  In those situations where the variance is less than the mean
the negative binomial can not be fitted.   Although the negative
binomial distribution is not defined for negative values of
  c  , the definition of the Poisson Index can be extended to
cover regular spatial distributions.   Where the variance of the
counts,   V  , is less than the mean of the counts, as for
regular distributions, the Poisson Index can be defined as:
  formula   which is Equation 2 rearranged to make   c  
the subject.   Thus for regular spatial distributions the
Poisson index will be negative.   For example, the
Poisson Indices for Fig. 1 A, B, C are -0.144, 0.012, and 0.564
respectively.  
    The problem of the variance being less than the mean only
occurred on the first sampling date (24 June 1985).   This was
caused by an under-estimation of the number of dung patches in
quadrats at the higher stocking densities.   After this fault was
realised the counting procedure was refined.   Hence the first
sampling date has been excluded from the subsequent analyses.
  Also the treatment which involved 1800 sheep/ha per day for 4
days did not have any true replication on a particular date as the
animals were all run on one large area rather than four independent
areas.   Therefore this treatment was left out of the analysis of
variance of the mean and Poisson Index and was analysed separately
using the variation between dates for an estimate of error.   The
fitted parameter estimates of   m   and   c   were
analysed using analysis of variance.   In the analysis of
variance, the sampling date x replicate combinations were fitted as
blocks.   There was one missing value in each of the analyses as
a result of the sheep escaping from the Treatment 5 plot in June
1986.    
        RESULTS      
        Spatial distribution of dung patches      
    At the first measurement (24 June 1985) of the number of
dung patches per quadrat (4 m  2  ) it was obvious that there
was an under-estimation at the higher stocking densities because of
the poor correlation between number of dung patches and sheep
(  r    2   = 0.22).   The counting method was
refined by reducing the arbitrary area covered by a dung patch
consisting of discrete pellets and a higher correlation was gained
at the June 1986 sampling (  r    2   0.50).   Since
stocking density and hence sheep numbers per plot were lower at the
October sampling, it was easier to distinguish individual dung
patches and the correlation between number of dung patches and
sheep was higher in both 1985 (  r    2   = 0.96) and
1986 (  r    2   = 0.88).  
  Table 2 Mean number of dung patches/4 m  2   in each
plot  
    The mean number of dung patches per quadrat increased with
stocking density (Table 2).   Over the three measurement dates,
there were significant differences (  P   &lt; 0.05) between the
four stocking densities.   There was no significant difference
between N and no N treatments at the lowest and highest stocking
densities or grazing duration at the highest stocking density.
  There were more dung patches counted in October 1986 than in
October 1985, which could be caused by variation in sheep behaviour
or variation in the counting technique.  
    The Poisson Index tended to decrease as stocking density
increased (Table 3).   At the lowest stocking density with N the
mean Poisson Index was significantly higher (  P   &lt; 0.05) than
at all other stocking densities.   The Poisson Index for the
lowest stocking density without N was also significantly higher
(  P   &lt; 0.05) than that for the highest stocking density, both
with and without N.   For each plot, counts from individual
quadrats     where    were     compared at different
grazings.   There was a poor correlation between grazings (Table
4) indicating that the animals were not depositing dung in the same
quadrats, i.e., the same part of the plot, at different grazings.
  The highest correlations were measured between the October 1985
and June 1986 grazings and here the correlation coefficient tended
to increase with stocking density but was low for the 4-day grazing
duration.  
        Pasture yield      
    There was a significant (  P   &lt; 0.05) pasture yield
response to April-applied urea measured before the first grazing in
1985 but not in 1986 (Table 5).   Pre-grazing pasture mass in
October declined with increasing stocking density in both years but
the only significant differences were between the lowest and
highest stocking densities (Table 6).   There was a significant
difference (  P   &lt; 0.05) in pre-grazing pasture mass between
N and no N at the two extreme stocking densities in October 1985.
  Pre-grazing pasture mass in October 1986 was much lower than in
October 1985 because winter and early spring growth rates were
reduced by lower temperatures.  
        Dung and urine characteristics      
    The number of defecations per sheep per day was estimated
as 26 (SE = 3.8) when the number of dung patches counted in each
plot at the October samplings was divided by the number of sheep
grazing each plot.   The average area of an individual dung patch
measured in June 1985 was 0.025 m  2   (SE = 0.01).
  Individual average urine patch area was measured as 0.03
m  2   (SE = 0.01) on 21 October 1985, after grazing on the
9OO sheep/ha per day plus N treatment.   The mean concentration
of nutrients in dung from the lowest stocking density was 0.55% K
(SE = 0.26), 0.67% P (SE = 0.21), and 2.2% N (SE =
0.8).  
        DISCUSSION      
    The results from this trial are further evidence that the
spatial distribution of sheep dung is best described by a negative
binomial distribution function as found by Tallis &amp; Donald (1964)
and Donald &amp; Leslie (1969).   The decrease in Poisson Index,
which is a measure of aggregation of dung patches, as stocking
density increased has also been reported by Donald &amp; Leslie (1969)
for sheep and Peterson et al. (1956) and Richards &amp; Wolton (1976)
for cattle.   Donald &amp;
  Table 3 Poisson Index,   c  , for distribution of dung
patches counts  
Leslie (1969) measured Poisson Indices of 0.56 and 0.69 from a
single grazing at 60 and 80 sheep/ha per day respectively.   At
a low stocking density of 58 cattle/ha per day, Peterson et al.
(1956) measured a Poisson Index of 0.57 whereas Richards &amp; Wolton
(1976) measured Poisson Indices of 0.10 and 0.20 at higher stocking
densities of 600 and 380 cattle/ha per day respectively.   The
range of the Poisson Index measured in this trial agrees with the
other reported values.   Thorrold et al. (1985) also reported
that dung distribution was less aggregated at higher stocking
rates.  
    In practical terms, the reported results indicate that at
winter stocking densities below 1200 sheep/ha per day and spring
stocking densities below 400 sheep/ha per day, dung tends to be
aggregated into a small proportion of the grazing area compared to
stocking densities above these levels.   The greater aggregation
of dung patches at the higher stocking density with a grazing
duration of 4 days compared to 1 day suggests that a 1-day shift
when block grazing with sheep during winter results in a more
uniform distribution of dung and hence a more efficient cycling of
plant nutrients in the dung.   Although shifting stock at longer
intervals has no deleterious effect on performance and requires
lower labour input, it results in a potential loss of plant
nutrients.   In the hill country environment, Gillingham (1982)
found no discernable effect on dung distribution when varying the
duration of grazing from 3 to 15 days and Thorrold et al. (1985)
gained a similar result after grazing for 7 and 21 days.   Other
factors such as aspect and slope tend to have an overriding effect
in the hill country situation.  
    The trend for the dung to be more consistently deposited in
the same quadrats by successive grazings at the higher stocking
densities, as found with the October and June grazings, could be
expected, since a larger proportion of the pasture is affected at
higher stocking densities and consequently, the likelihood of the
same quadrat being affected would be greater.   Donald &amp; Leslie
(1969) also found that there was a higher correlation in dung
distribution between grazings at higher stocking densities and
attributed this to the tendency of sheep to use the same portion of
a field for resting and rumination where heavy concentrations of
faeces are deposited.   However, this trend was not observed when
other grazings were compared, despite the shorter time span between
one other pair of grazings.   A possible explanation for the
lower correlation at the 4-day grazing compared to 1-day grazing
was the greater opportunity for the sheep to excrete over a larger
area.   Despite the lower pre-grazing herbage mass in October
1986 compared to October 1985, the number of dung patches in each
quadrat was lower, indicating that there is no relationship between
pasture mass and number of excretions.  
    Although there is little information in the literature on
the frequency of sheep urination and defecation and the area
affected, it is interesting to compare the measured results with
other reported values that do exist.   It was not possible to
measure the frequency of sheep urination in the reported trial and
the only value available in the literature is 20 urinations
  Table 4 Correlation coefficients for distribution of dung
patches between grazings  
per day (Doak 1952) derived from dividing the total daily volume of
urine by the volume of an individual urination.   The 26
defecations per day derived by dividing the total number of
defecations per area by the number of sheep present is higher than
the value of 19 defecations per day (Morton 1984) derived from
dividing the average daily weight of faeces by the mean weight of
one defecation.   Both values are much higher than the 6-8
defecations per sheep per day reported by Frame (1971) using an
unstated technique.   The accuracy of the two measurement
techniques used depends on the definition of a dung patch
especially when it is composed of scattered pellets.   This
variation in the area of an individual dung patch is illustrated by
the disparity between values of 0.0075 m  2   (Frame 1971),
0.012 m  2   (Morton 1984), and 0.025 m  2   in this
paper, all derived assuming the area is oblong and measuring the
two sides.   Both the latter measurements were on a mixture of
wet deposits and discrete pellets of dung so an average value
between these may be the best estimation.   In contrast there is
complete agreement between the measured value of 0.03 m  2  
per individual urine patch and that reported by Doak (1952).
  The same worker used the enhanced growth of grass and deep
green colour, which are features of the urine patch a few weeks
after voiding, to measure the area within which stimulation of
growth occurred and found an average value of 0.064 m  2  .
  Since the reported trial was sited on a pakihi soil with
impeded vertical drainage where most water movement is lateral
surface runoff, it could be assumed that the actual area eventually
affected by urine K and also N was at least similar to the area
measured by Doak (1952).   The P concentration of dung measured
here is similar to the reported value of 0.5% P (Bromfield 1961)
but lower than the value of 1.4% (Herriot &amp; Wells 1963).   These
workers also found higher values for dung N (3.2%) and K (1.3%)
than measured in this trial.  
    There is no reported research on the duration of sheep dung
N, P, and K effects and urine K and N effects and it can only be
assumed that they are similar to cattle dung and urine (Norman &amp;
Green 1958&semi; During &amp; McNaught 1961&semi; During et al. 1973&semi; During &amp;
Weeda 1973), i.e., 3 months for urine N, 1 year for urine K, and 2
years for dung N and P.   Recent research (Williams 1988)
suggests that the duration of the urine K effect is 1 year rather
than 2 years.  
    Using these parameters and assumptions, the proportion of
pasture affected by dung N and P can be estimated as follows.   A
paddock of area   A   is divided into quadrats of area equal
to that of a single dung patch,   a  .   From the stocking
rate and number of grazing days, the number of sheep grazing days
is calculated and then multiplied by the average number of
defecations per day per sheep to give the total number of dung
patches in the paddock,   n  .   The mean number of dung
patches expected in each quadrat,   D  , is then
  na/A  .   Using the estimated value of the Poisson Index,
  c  , the proportion of pasture surface covered by at least
one excreta patch,   P  , can be found using Equation 1, to
be:
  formula (4)  
  Table 6 Pre-grazing pature mass (kg DM/ha) before spring
grazing (October)  
  For small values of   D   (  D   &lt;&lt;
1)   P   &approx;   D  
because there is a very small probability of dung patches
overlapping but as   D   increases there are more quadrats
with overlapping dung patches and   P   &lt;
  D  .   Also   P   decreases as c increases, because
of a higher aggregation of dung patches.  
    The following calculations assume one winter grazing
similar to June 1985 and seven other grazings similar to October
1985 and 1986 per year.   Parameters used include measured values
of c for the treatments without N, 26 defecations per day, 0.025
m  2   affected by each defecation, a 2-year duration of
effect for dung N and P, a 1-year duration for urine K, and a
3-month duration for urine N.   At the highest stocking density,
52% of the pasture was affected by the N and P in at least one dung
patch whereas at the lowest stocking density, 31% of the pasture
was affected.   Using a measured value of 315 g faeces DM
excreted per sheep per day grazing ryegrass/white clover pasture
(Morton 1984) and the P concentration in dung measured in this
trial, a total of 12.7 kg P/ha is applied in dung at the highest
stocking density and 6.3 kg P/ha at the lowest stocking density.
  At the high stocking density therefore, dung P makes a
significant contribution to the soil P pool.   Since the N
concentration measured in dung was 3 times the P concentration, the
rate of N applied in dung could be estimated as 36 kg/ha at the
highest stocking density and 18 kg/ha at the lowest stocking
density.   Morton (1984) found that 72% of the N and P in sheep
dung were in the organic form so the N and P from the dung would
become available to pasture depending on the rate of
mineralisation,     and could only be regarded as slowly
available.   Dung K would affect 30% of the pasture at the
highest stocking density and 17% at the lowest stocking density
resulting in a return of 10.4 kg K/ha at the highest stocking
density and 5.2 kg K/ha at the lowest stocking density.  
    Assuming that the lack of difference between the pattern of
dung and urine distribution for cattle is similar for sheep (as
observed by Peterson et al. (1956)) then the same calculations can
be carried out for urine K and N effects.   These calculations
show that at the highest stocking density, 49% of the pasture was
affected by urine K whereas at the lowest stocking density, 28% of
the pasture was affected.   If the assumptions for duration of
effect and area affected are correct then these high proportions
affected by urine K could have an effect on fertiliser K
requirements.   If it is assumed that 170 kg K/ha is applied in
the urine patch (Herriott &amp; Crooks 1971), and there is a recovery
of 23% (During &amp; McNaught 1961) by pasture then 39 kg K/ha is
available to the pasture.   In a trial carried out on an Addison
gley podzol (Morton 1981), cycling of urine K was recognised as one
of the major factors involved in lower fertiliser K requirements
(25 kg/ha) under grazing compared to cutting.  
    Previous research suggests that the duration of effect for
urine N is only 3 months.   For urine N, 15% of the pasture will
be affected at the highest stocking density and 7% at the lowest
stock density.  
    These low estimated values for urine N reveal the reason
why there was a small carry-over effect of the autumn-applied urea
after the first grazing (Table 6).   An increase in pasture cover
in October was gained by grazing more laxly at 900 sheep/ha per
day in June but this would only be a practical proposition at low
stocking rates of less than 8 sheep/ha.   The initial pasture
yield response to April-applied urea (Table 5) was similar to that
gained in other West Coast trials (Williams &amp; Paterson 1983&semi; Morton
unpubl. data).   The lower increase in pasture yield caused by N
in 1986 was due to the urea being applied to a high pasture mass
(1740 kg DM/ha) and poor climatic conditions for pasture growth
thereafter.  
    The sodium fluorescin technique used allowed the boundaries
of individual urine patches to be easily identified at the lowest
stocking density provided at least three doses were administered to
the grazing animals.   In 1986, the technique was tried with only
one dosing but it was impossible to delineate the separate urine
patches.    
  

          MATERIALS AND METHODS      
    Cocoons of   K. isopodicola   were carefully
removed from rocks at Seal Reef, Kaikoura, New Zealand.
  Encapsulated larvae dissected from a cocoon were immediately
placed in 4% glutaraldehyde in 0.025M phosphate buffer.
  Following immersion for 6 h in the fixative at room
temperature, the material was washed in phosphate buffer (three
changes), then post-fixed in 2% osmium tetroxide in phosphate
buffer for 5 h at room temperature.   Specimens were dehydrated
in acetone and embedded in Spurr 's epoxy resin.   Sections were
cut on an LKB Ultrotome.   Some were stained with uranyl nitrate
for 30 min, counterstained with lead citrate for 5 min, and
photographed with a Hitachi HS-7 electron microscope&semi; others were
stained with uranyl nitrate for 1 h, then with lead citrate for 20
min, and photographed using a JEM-1200 EX electron microscope at 80
kV.   Almost all sections of six encapsulated larvae, and
separate sections of several other individuals, were examined.  
    For light microscopy, entire cocoons and their contents
were fixed in Bouin 's fluid.   Sections (7 &mu;m in
thickness) were stained with Mallory 's trichrome, or with Ehrlich 's
haematoxylin and eosin.   Observations were made by conventional
light microscopy (LM) on living encapsulated larvae, and
encapsulated and swimming larvae were observed by stereoscopic
microscopy.   Several hatched larvae were fixed in 10% formalin
and prepared as unstained whole mounts.  
        OBSERVATIONS      
        Light microscopy (stereoscopic study)      
    Egg capsules are transparent.   Encapsulated pairs of
larvae sometimes circle within the confined spaces of the eggshells
by the activity of locomotory cilia.   Each larva has two
eyespots, which shine brightly by reflected light.  
    The free-swimming larva frequently rotates about its
longitudinal axis and constantly changes shape by muscular
action.  
        Light microscopy (conventional light
microscopy)      
    Locomotory cilia cover the body of the living encapsulated
larva, beating in a pattern of metachronal waves.   The eyes are
embedded in the parenchyma, approximately one fifth of the body
length from the anterior end (Fig. 1).   Each eye is in part
composed of a translucent cup-shaped body (Fig. 1, cb), the cavity
of which encloses the light sensitive apparatus.   The cup-shaped
body, which contains no pigment granules, is oriented with the
concavity directed dorsolaterally.   When the eye is viewed with
the concavity upwardly directed, the middle region appears brown
(Fig. 1), often with a white spot at the centre.   An optic nerve
(Fig. 1, on) extends an appreciable distance posteriorly, and
enters the cerebral mass (Fig. 1, ce).  
      Kronborgia isopodicola   is unique among known
fecampiids in that the eyes persist throughout life,
notwithstanding an endoparasitic mode of existence and enclosure
within a cocoon in the final phase of the life history.   The eye
of the mature female is appreciably larger than the larval eye&semi;
observed in lateral view, it displays an outer red to reddish
purple colour, which appears to be located within the cup wall, and
an inner clear blue-green area.  
    In sectioned material the epidermis of the encapsulated
larva stains mauve with both Mallory 's triple dye and
haematoxylin-eosin.  
    Newly hatched larvae, mounted whole, were examined by
reflected light.   Although the eyes showed a reduced brilliance,
they were still visible as a pair of shining bodies against a black
background&semi; this property did not depend on their
orientation.  
        Electron microscopy (EM)      
      Egg capsule.     The egg capsule is
uniformly thin, and of moderate to high electron density (Fig. 2,
5, ec).  
      Epidermis.     The epidermis is composed
of multi-ciliated cells, with complete lateral walls (Fig. 3, cw).
  Epidermal cells are linked by encircling desmosomal structures,
viz. septa-containing junctions (Fig. 3, sj) overlain by zonulae
adhaerentes (Fig. 3, za).   The locomotory cilia are of the
9+2 type (Fig. 4), and each is supported by two cross-striated
rootlets.   Microvilli between the ciliary bases (Fig. 2, mv) are
topped with a fuzz of glycocalyx.   Ovoid epidermal protrusions
(Fig. 2,6, ep) are observed among the ciliary bases.  
  figure: Fig. 1  
  caption  
    In all specimens examined, numerous large, cylindrical
dense bodies (Fig. 2, 6, db) were the predominant constituents of
the epidermis.   These bodies show no apparent acidophilia by LM
techniques&semi; they are not found in ducts, nor are they found in
tissues beneath the epidermis.   Their elongate shape is neither
initiated nor maintained by microtubules.   The cylindrical dense
bodies are membrane-limited, and exist in two forms, granular and
vesicular.   The limiting membrane of the granular form is
associated with an underlying layer of dense material, and the
interior often contains clusters or strings of small vesicles.
  Vesicular bodies are surrounded by a compact coating of
electron-dense granules (Fig. 4,6,g).   The granular cylindrical
bodies are interpreted as phagosomes, and the vesiculated bodies as
vesicular lysosomes (Williams 1990b).   Phagosomes frequently
show a vesiculated portion consisting of accumulated membranes or
closely packed vesicles (Fig. 3, arrow).   Closed membrane
profiles among the cilia (Fig. 2,4,6, star) immediately overlie
both phagosomes and lysosomes.  
    Numerous vesicles (Fig. 2, v), some clear, some containing
a central mass of granular material, are concentrated in the
remaining cytoplasm.   Mitochondria (Fig. 3, M) are
plentiful, but ER cisternae and Golgi systems are rarely
encountered in the packed cytoplasm.  
    A clearly defined basal lamina (Fig. 2, bl) rests on a wide
fibrous layer (Fig. 2, fl).   Muscle cells of the subepidermal
strata (Fig. 2, mc) are attached to the internal surface of the
fibrous layer by hemidesmosomes.  
        Subepidermal glands      
    The parenchymal tissue is composed largely of interweaving
processes of the many subepidermal glands.   Cell extensions
containing spheroid or ovoid mucus globules (Fig. 7, Mg), showing
the characteristic delicate lines and stippling, occupy a
significant portion of the parenchyma.   The mucus globules are
6.4-0.7 &mu;m long.   Frequently seen are cell processes
containing elongate, ovoid, or conical granules marked by parallel
striations of variable width perpendicular to the long axis, or a
ripple pattern (Fig. 5,7, Ss).   The granules measure 0.4-0.5
&mu;m in length and 0.2-0.3 &mu;m in maximum diameter.
  Other ovoid secretory bodies within cell processes have
diameters similar to those of the striated granules, but are of
uniform, moderate electron density (Fig. 5, sb  1  ).  
    Additional cell extensions contain relatively large
secretory bodies (0.5-0.8 &mu;m in length, maximum diameter
of 0.4-0.5 &mu;m), spherical or slightly elongated in shape,
and of high electron density (Fig. 5,7, sb  2  ).   The
gland cell nucleus (Fig. 7, N) contains an eccentrically placed
nucleolus (Fig. 7, No).   Nuclear chromatin is mostly of the
finely dispersed type&semi; condensed chromatin occurs in small patches
(Fig. 7, cc) but does not form a layer opposed to the inner nuclear
membrane.   Glands of a further category contain moderately dense
secretory bodies (Fig. 5, sb  3  ), similar to the highly
dense granules in shape and dimensions.  
    Minute dense spheres, 0.1 &mu;m in diameter, are
enclosed in cell prolongations which extend towards the
subepidermal fibrous layer (Fig. 5, arrows).
  figure: Fig.2 and 3  
  captions  
  figure: Fig.4 and 5  
  captions  
  figure: Fig.6 and 7  
  captions  
  Striated granules (Fig. 5, Ssd), the smaller granules of
moderate density (Fig. 5, sb  1  d), and the dense spherules
were observed in microtubule-supported ducts passing through the
epidermis.  
      The eye.     The cup structure is formed
by a single cell (Fig. 8, 10).   Strictly, the cell is not
cup-shaped&semi; the rim is extended as arched, narrow folds or
flattened processes, the shape of which is supported and maintained
by microtubules (Fig. 8, mt).   The processes meet at the mid
point where they do not fuse, but are linked by junctional
structures (Fig. 10).   The cell accordingly takes the form of a
hollow sphere, with the bulk of cytoplasm and the nucleus on one
side.   Vacuoles (Fig. 8-10, va) are contained within or directly
underlie the narrow processes.  
    In the developing eye, the cup cell nucleus is large and
chromatin exists mainly in the dispersed form.   Small masses of
chromatin in the condensed configuration are observed (Fig. 8, cc)
with associated perichromatin granules (Fig. 8 crossed arrow)&semi;
there is little or no peripherally located condensed chromatin.
  The relatively clear cytoplasm contains Golgi systems (Fig. 9,
G) and mitochondria (Fig. 9, M).   Long, parallel endoplasmic
reticulum cisternae, largely devoid of bound ribosomes (Fig. 8,
ER), are characteristic of the differentiating cup cell.
  Membrane-limited dense granules (Fig. 8,9, dg) are thinly
scattered in the general cytoplasm&semi; they are concentrated in the
Golgi zones and adjacent to the plasmalemma bounding the concavity
of the cup.   The granules have no centres&semi; many central spaces
have sharply defined sides and angles, suggesting that crystal-like
material was lost during preparation of the material for EM.
  Large spherical or ovoid granules are found in the Golgi zones,
some apparently without crystal-shaped spaces (Fig. 9, star),
others evidently having contained organised crystals (Fig. 8,
star).   Granules near the concavity of the cup are smaller and
more elongate, with a reduced dense component&semi; they tend to be
aligned in rows parallel to the plasmalemma (Fig. 8).   Small
vesicles are interposed between the granules.  
    Also associated with the Golgi systems are coated vesicles
(Fig. 9, 10, cv), and distinctive membrane bounded vesicles, each
having a dense central granule
    surrounde    surrounded     by a clear halo (Fig.
9, hg).   The haloed granules are found also in the narrow
processes of the cup cell (Fig. 9  , 10, arrow).  
    In the fully differentiated ocellus, large areas of the
lucid cup cell cytoplasm are devoid of organelles.   Many
membrane-limited crystals, with little or no associated dense
material, are organised as uniformly shaped plates&semi; they are
disposed end-to-end in concentric layers (residual spaces shown in
Fig. 8, inset), in a regular bowl-shaped array.   Cytoplasm
between the plates is present as a filamentous and relatively dense
reticulum (Fig. 8, inset).  
    Each ocellus contains three photoreceptor cells (Fig. 9),
processes of which penetrate through membrane-limited spaces in the
narrow-walled portion of the cup cell.   The photosensitive
element of a receptor cell is a rhabdomere, a cluster of elongated,
unbranched microvilli (Fig. 8 and inset, 9, mv).   All receptor
cells possess photosensitive elements of the rhabdomeric type, the
microvilli lying parallel in a compact tuft.   The receptor cell
process spreads out as a bulbous enlargement immediately outside
the confines of the cup cell (Fig. 10)&semi; the nucleus
(Fig    ,    .     9, 10, N&prime;) is located level with the
cup cell nucleus (Fig. 10).   The three photoreceptor cells are
evenly spaced, and a section through the centre of the eyecup and
one receptor cell body generally does not pass through a second
receptor cell perikaryon (Fig. 9, 10).   A receptor cell is a
highly specialised bipolar neurone, the short process between
perikaryon and rhabdomere representing the dentritic fibre.
  Long axons from the receptor cells of each eye combines to form
the optic nerve.   Abundant large mitochondria (Fig. 9,
M&prime;), coated vesicles (Fig. 9,10,cv&prime;)and
glycogen granules (Fig. 9, gl) are present in the dendritic and
pericaryal cytoplasm.  
    Apposing membranes of receptor and pigment cells are
thickened and linked over wide areas as junctional structures (Fig.
9, 10, j) of septa-containing and zonulae adhaerentes types.  
    Invariably, a secretory cell process containing dense
spherules is inserted between each eye and the body wall (Fig.
6,8-10, Ng).   The spherules measure 0.2 &mu;m in diameter&semi;
in form and density they resemble neurosecretory granules.   The
secretory cell body is separated from the eye by a short distance,
and is located external to the perikarya of parenchymal glands.
  The epidermis overlying both the developing eye and the
differentiated  eye (Fig. 6) is unmodified&semi; cilia and dense
cylindrical bodies are present as usual, and the basal lamina and
fibrous layer are unattenuated.   The subepidermal muscle coats
appear unchanged.    
        DISCUSSION      
        Epidermis      
    Presumably certain proteins, such as membrane and
glycocalyx proteins and lysosomal enzymes, are produced by the
larval epidermis&semi; however, the sparse distribution of Golgi systems
and GER cisternae 
  figure: Fig.8  
  caption  
  figure: Fig.9  
  caption  
indicates that comparatively little protein synthesis occurs in the
epidermal cells, and no bodies corresponding with the
epitheliosomes of Tyler (1984) were observed.   Similarly,
K&oslash;ie &amp; Bresciani (1973) reported a scarcity of
cellular machinery for protein synthesis in the epidermis of the
free-swimming larval   K. amphipodicola  .   The general
epidermal cells of   Kronborgia   larvae therefore do not
appear to synthesise materials which subserve a function external
to the epithelium, with the exception of glycocalyx constituents
(for discussion of glycocalyx function see Williams 1950b).  
  figure: Fig.10  
  caption  
    In all examined encapsulated larvae, the large cylindrical
phagosomes and vesicular lysosomes were packed closely and occupied
a major portion of the epidermal volume, as also characterises the
parasitic male   K. isopodicola  .   By contrast, similar
lysosomal bodies of the parasitic female are widely spaced and do
not take up the bulk of the epidermal cytoplasm (Williams,
unpubl.).  
    Phagosomes evidently give rise to secondary lysosomes by a
process involving progressive vesiculation.   Closed membrane
profiles shed from the epidermal free surface probably represent
eliminated waste membranes of lysosomal activity.   The existence
of abundant vesicles and large lysosomes in the digestive epidermis
of the parasitic male   K. isopodicola   and a tendency for
the epidermis to give rise to surface protrusions, were reported
earlier (Williams 1990b).   These possibly function in the uptake
and processing of nutrients, or excretion.   Presence of such
structures in the encapsulated larva suggests that already at this
stage of development, despite enclosure of the animal within an
eggshell, the epidermis functions in nutrient uptake and digestion.
  Metabolites evidently pass through the thin, probably untanned
egg capsules&semi; the metabolites may be derived from substances
emitted from the shrivelling bodies of parent worms (Williams
1990a&semi; 1990c) into the matrix material of the cocoon cavity.  
    Descriptions are recorded of a variety of mechanisms for
the uptake of bulk nutrients by digestive epithelia of acoelomates.
  Sheet-like lamellae project from the intestinal epithelium of
the haemophagous trematode   Schistosoma mansoni  &semi; the
lamellae recurve to join the epithelial surface, so forming
blood-filled vacuoles (Morris 1968).   In a study of the
endocytosis of haemolysed blood by the ciliated intestinal
epithelium of the rhynchocoelan   Lineus ruber  , Jennings
(1969) found that substantial projections of the apical cytoplasm
fuse, engulfing the food and enclosing it in vacuoles which are
then interiorised.   The caecal epithelium of the aspidogastrid
  Aspidogaster conchicola   possesses surface lamellae which
branch, anastomose, and rejoin the surface, trapping particulate
food in the process (Halton 1972).   When prey organisms such as
ciliates pass into the intestine of the umagillid   Syndesmis
francescana  , opposing luminal surfaces of the intestinal
epithelium meet, causing local occlusions.   Apparently in this
manner the prey is enclosed in vacuoles which then become
intracellular (Holt &amp; Mettrick 1975).   The parasitic
turbellarian   Acholades asteris   feeds on host cells and
tissues via a ciliated epidermis.   Extracorporeal digestion
takes place, after which partially digested products are
endocytosed in large pinocytotic vesicles (Jennings 1989).   In
contrast, no morphological evidence for bulk uptake of nutrients
was observed in the epidermal epithelia of the encapsulated larval
  K. isopodicola   (present paper), the parasitic female
  K. amphipodicola   by Bresciani &amp; K&oslash;ie
(1970), or the parasitic male   K. isopodicola   by Williams
(1990b).   Presumably, low molecular weight organic substances,
from the matrix materials in the cocoon and the   hosts'  
coelomic fluids, pass across the apical epidermal plasma membranes
into the epidermal cells and there are catabolised by heterophagic
processes.  
    The epidermis of the encapsulated   K. isopodicola  
larva is protective, already possesses a functional locomotory
ciliation, and evidently functions in the uptake and catabolism of
nutrients and the elimination of waste products of heterophagy.
  Flame cells are found in the encapsulated larva (Watson et al.
in press), but major collecting canals and nephridiopores are
absent.   Correspondingly, the epidermis probably functions
significantly in osmoregulation and also in the elimination of
nitrogenous wastes&semi; it is presumably also active in respiration and
ionic regulation.   The epidermis is extraordinarily
multifunctional&semi; however, in the encapsulated larva and throughout
life in both sexes (Williams 1990b and unpublished observations),
the general epidermis of   K. isopodicola   differs from that
of many turbellarians in that it is not a secretory tissue.  
        Subepidermal glands      
    Mucus glands, glands synthesising striated secretory
granules and the smaller granules of moderate electron density, and
cells producing dense spherules are present in both males and
females at maturity, in addition to the encapsulated larvae&semi;
possible functions for the various secretions produced by adults of
both sexes were listed previously (Williams 1990b&semi; 1990c).
  K&oslash;ie &amp; Bresciani (1973) reported that the larva
of   K. amphipodicola   encysts on the surface of its host
before penetrating the host 's tissues, and the remaining two types
of secretory body of the larval   K. isopodicola   (the
larger moderately dense and highly dense granules) may be the
products of cystogenous glands.   Alternatively, the bodies may
represent the two principal secretory products confined to the
mature male, which they resemble&semi; all specimens examined were
perhaps developing males, the sex distribution possibly being
skewed so that the majority of larvae are potentially male.   It
is of interest that Christensen &amp; Kanneworff (1965), in a study of
sex distribution in   K. amphipodicola  , found 3-25 times
more males than females in a single host animal, the exact ratio
depending on the host species.  
      K. isopodicola   evidently is not a protandric
hermaphrodite.   The cocoon phase male dies without leaving the
cocoon or undergoing sex reversal.   During the parasitic phase,
males generally are distinguishable from developing females of
equivalent size by their flatter and more regular shape, and
frequently by an everted distal chamber of the male duct or the
presence of spermatozoa.  
        The eye      
    The fully differentiated eye of the larva of   K.
isopodicola   closely resembles the eye of the larval
  Polystoma integerrimum  , in which a pigment cup light
shield is absent, and light is concentrated by reflection (Fournier
&amp; Combes 1978).   In place of a pigment cup cell, the eye of
  Polystoma   possesses a cell that manufactures specialised
reflective plates (crystals), which are arrayed as a bowl-shaped
mirror.   The eye of   K. isopodicola   similarly has a
mirror cell in place of a pigment cup, the dimensions of the
crystals corresponding with those of   Polystoma  .   In
each instance there is no crystalline lens&semi; after incoming rays
have passed through the rhabdomeres, light is focussed by
reflection from the concave surfaces of the curved mirror plate
layers.   Incident light does not pass through the receptor cell
perikarya.  
      Polystoma   and   Kronborgia   are the only
platyhelminth genera known to possess an ocellar reflective
apparatus&semi; however, very similar reflective devices have been
described for other animals, such as the rotifer
  Asplanchna   (see Eakin &amp; Westfall 1965) and the scallop,
  Pecten  .   The functional principles of the
  Pecten   eye were investigated by Land (1965&semi; 1966).
  The mirror is a multilayer quarter-wavelength reflector, a
highly efficient reflective system which functions by the principle
of constructive interference.   Inner and outer surfaces of the
crystals are parallel, and all crystals have an optical thickness
of 1/4 wavelength.   Light passing through cytoplasm, reflected
from the inner surface of a crystal which has a higher refractive
index, undergoes a phase change of 1/2 wavelength.   Light
reflected from the outer interface, after passing twice through the
crystal, is retarded by 1/2 wavelength and emerges in phase with
the ray reflected from the inner interface, and constructive
interference results.   Reflectivity of the organ is greatly
enhanced by the presence of a number of crystal layers.   It is
assumed that intervening layers of cytoplasm also have an optical
thickness of 1/4 wavelength, so that light reflected at each
interface interferes constructively with light reflected from all
others&semi; by this device the reflectivity of an apparatus composed of
biological materials approaches that of a mirror of polished metal.
  The reflected light is coloured, according to the wavelength to
which the system is adapted.   In the   Pecten   eye, the
reflected light is blue-green&semi; i.e., it has a wavelength roughly in
the middle of the visible spectrum.   Any light transmitted
through the apparatus is of the complementary colour, red or
reddish purple.  
    The eye of the living   Polystoma   larva displays
outer bright red and inner clear blue layers (Zeller 1872,1876&semi;
Hesse 1897&semi; Andr&eacute; 1910&semi; Williams 1960).   These
colours have been interpreted as visual pigments (photopigments),
photochemical conversion of which was thought to initiate the nerve
impulse (Hesse 1897&semi; Andr&eacute; 1910).   The
correspondence with colours seen in the eye of the female
  Kronborgia   is striking.   In these two platyhelminth
genera, the colours may be produced by transmission and reflection
in the normal functioning of the eye, as outlined above.
  Alternatively, they may be caused by diffraction of the light
beam passing through the microscope, by the intricately
    structure    structured     crystal complex.
  Whichever is correct, the colours are not pigmentary, but
result from the physical interaction of light with the crystal
layers.  
    During development of the   Kronborgia   ocellus,
large dense granules arise in the Golgi zones of the cup cell.
  Crystals form within the granules, which then migrate towards
the concavity.   The granules elongate and align in regular
stacks, and the crystals give rise to uniformly shaped mirror
plates as the dense component is reduced.   The mirror is
envisaged as a stable structure, the aligned plates presumably
being linked and stabilised as a result of functional
characteristics of the interposed vesicles, or the nature of the
intervening modified cytoplasm.  
    Coated vesicles are interpreted as the transport form of
desmosomal constituents (Williams 1982).   Juxtaposed coated
vesicles in a receptor cell and mirror cell may fuse with the
plasma membranes, and flatten out to form the two halves of a
junctional structure.   It was suggested by Carpenter et al.
(1974) that desmosomes between the cup cell and receptor cells of
  Dugesia dorotocephala   may function to electrically
integrate movement of     tne    the     pigment
granules in light or dark adaptation with the photoresponse of the
rhabdomeres.   This does not apply to the eye of the larval
  Kronborgia   and although electrical and other interchanges
between the cells are not ruled out, clearly the desmosomes must
play an important role in maintaining the mechanical stability of
the organ in a vigorously moving animal.  
    Although most turbellarian photosensitive systems are of
the rhabdomeric type (references in Rees 1975&semi; Sopott-Ehlers 1984,
1988), some are of ciliary origin (references in Eakin &amp;
Brandenburger 1981&semi; Pike &amp; Wink 1986&semi; Rohde &amp; Watson 1990).
  Certain of the ciliary photoreceptive devices are composed of
essentially unmodified cilia&semi; among others, modification of the
organelles is extreme.   A common factor in all turbellarian
photosensory systems is the considerably expanded plasmalemma,
associated with a minimal quantity of cytoplasm.  
    A true lens in the eye of the oncomiracidium of
  Entobdella soleae   was described by Kearn &amp; Baker (1973),
and the eye of the cercaria of   Trichobilharzia ocellata  
possesses a lens-like structure of electron-dense material in a
process of the pigment cell (Van de Roemer &amp; Hass 1984).
  Although the fluid-filled vacuoles and narrow arched processes
of the mirror cell have the potential to refract light, no
specialised refractive apparatus serving to concentrate incoming
light was seen   in   the larval   K. isopodicola  
eye.  
    Platyhelminth eyes may undergo considerable morphological
change during light or dark adaptation (e.g., MacRae 1966&semi; Bedeni
et al. 1976&semi; Lanfranchi &amp; Bedeni 1982).   Material used in this
study was fixed immediately after removal from the cocoon under
laboratory conditions.   The typical microvillar structure of the
rhabdomeres evidently represents the configuration of the
photosensitive apparatus when adapted to subdued light, such as
might enter the cocoon through the nozzle opening.   Light rays
entering the cocoon would pass freely through the transparent
capsules.  
    Presumably, light impinging on the convex faces of the
mirror layers is reflected outwards&semi; the mirror may therefore
provide an effective light shield, as does the more commonly found
cup-shaped organisation of pigment granules.   Accordingly, light
reception is directional, and the direction of light passing
through the nozzle opening is probably detected by the hatched
larva.   Once released from the cocoon, the free swimming larva
is presumably able to distinguish between the direction of the
sunlit or moonlit sea surface and the direction of the dark rock
face or seabed, and a phototropic response may result.   When the
swimming larva rotates about its longitudinal axis, the refinement
of multidirectional scanning would be a possibility (see also Kearn
1978).  
    The mirror cell ocellus, providing both a focussing
mechanism and a light shield, appears to be more advanced than eyes
of the pigment cup variety.   Mirror cell eyes with similar
optical characteristics seem to have arisen independently by
convergent evolution in platyhelminths, rotifers, and molluscs.
  Whether or not the mirror cell of the larval   K.
isopodicola   is a modified pigment cell cannot be conjectured
at present.  
    Epidermal cells overlying the eyes of the polyclad
  Notoplana acticola   lack secretory products found in other
cells of the epithelium (MacRae 1966).   Very modified epidermal
cells and other tissues overlying eyes are found among planarians&semi;
dense structures are absent from these circular areas, which are
optically transparent.   Eyes are eccentrically placed in
relation to clear regions, lending the animals the characteristic
droll, cross-eyed appearance (e.g., Carpenter et al. 1974).   In
contrast, the eyes of the larval   K. isopodicola   are
overlain by unmodified epidermal cells, basal lamina, fibrous
layer, and muscle strata, in addition to presumed neurosecretory
cell processes&semi; also, incident light falling directly on the
rhabdomeres is unfocussed, only reflected rays being concentrated.
  Furthermore, the ocellus includes only three photoreceptor
cells.   Thus, the optical system, although it efficiently
gathers and enhances light energy, has a low optical resolution and
merely produces elementary images.   Nevertheless, the eye of the
swimming larva presumably is capable of detecting a sudden change
in illumination, as would occur when an animal passing between the
larva and the light source casts a shadow, and this specific
ability may assist in host location.     

      OWLS    
    Owls (family Strigidae) are nocturnal predatory birds
with thick soft plumage and forward-facing eyes surrounded by
a round facial disc.   They have big heads with a short
hooked beak, short tails, large rounded wings and strong legs
equipped with talons.   Owls are light relative to their
wing area and they are able to fly buoyantly with little
flapping.   Their eyes are adapted to seeing in low light -
though they cannot see in total darkness - and they have acute
hearing.   The plumage is usually cryptically coloured&semi; most
woodland owls are drab grey or brown.  
      Laughing Owl       (Figure 27)  
    The Laughing Owl or Whekau (  Sceloglaux
albifacies  ) was about twice as big as a Morepork
(  Ninox novaeseelandiae  ) and had longer legs even
allowing for size.   It once occurred throughout the three
main islands of New Zealand: bones have been found at numerous
subfossil sites including Maori kitchen middens.   There is
also a somewhat dubious record of subfossil bones from the
Chatham Islands.   In historical times the Laughing Owl was
known in the North Island from only two museum skins and from
two reliable sightings.   The skins were collected near Mt
Egmont in 1854 and from Wairarapa about 1868 (both are now
lost), and the sightings were at Waikohu near Gisborne in 1889
and near Porirua before 1892.  photo  
  caption  
  In the South Island the Laughing Owl was widely recorded
in Nelson, Canterbury, Otago, Fiordland and on Stewart Island,
but declined rapidly after about 1880.   The last known
specimen was found dead in July 1914 at Blue Cliffs, South
Canterbury.  
    The Laughing Owl was first described in 1844 from a
specimen obtained at Waikouaiti near Dunedin.   The bird was
then fairly common, but relatively few were collected for
museums and 40 years after discovery it was virtually gone.
  Two captive birds in Britain weighed about 600 g each when
examined by G.D. Rowley in the 1870s.   Rowley wrote:
  'More gentle animals could not be&semi; they allow
themselves to be handled without any resentment.'    
    South Island Laughing Owls seemed to prefer forest
edges and rocky areas in open country.   They were strictly
nocturnal and may have been largely ground-feeders.   Their
known foods were lizards, small birds, rodents, earthworms and
insects such as beetles.   The name 'laughing owl' refers to
the weird call, said by T.H. Potts to be a   'loud cry,
made up of a series of dismal shrieks frequently
repeated'  .   A few nests lined with dry grass were
found in crevices among rocks.   The usual clutch was two
eggs.   The eggs were about 50 mm by 40 mm, and pure white
as is typical of owl eggs.  
      NEW ZEALAND WRENS    
      Bush Wren       (Figure 28)  
    The loss of the Bush Wren (  Xenicus longipes  )
is the saddest story in this book because it is the latest New
Zealand bird to die out, and because its demise was realised
in retrospect and attracted no public attention.  
    This bird once occurred throughout New Zealand.
  The North Island subspecies (  Xenicus longipes
stokesii  ) is known from only three museum specimens - two
collected in the Rimutaka Range about 1850 and one from Taupo.
  No other specimens are known, and there have been no
confirmed sightings, but subfossil bones show that it once
occurred more widely in the North Island.   The South Island
race (  Xenicus longipes longipes  ) was widespread at
the time of European settlement, especially in mountain
forest.   Oliver (1955) described it as   'found
sparingly'   and   'not infrequently seen'  
but noted that its range was contracting.   Stead 's Bush
Wren (  Xenicus longipes variabilis  ), named
as  photo  
  caption  
a distinct subspecies by Edgar Stead in 1936, was found on
islands off the south  -  west coast of Stewart
Island.  
    Bush Wrens may have been seen in the South Island as
late as 1968, but there are no later substantiated records.
  By the 1960s Stead 's Bush Wren had become confined to Big
South Cape Island off Stewart Island.   A Ship Rat was first
recorded on Big South Cape in 1955, but this was probably an
isolated individual.   The main increase began in 1962, the
rats having apparently reached the island along the mooring
lines of fishing boats.   Their numbers quickly reached
plague proportions and birds declined rapidly.   Before the
wrens disappeared in 1967, the Wildlife Service transferred
six to nearby rat-free Kaimohu Island.   Two were seen on
Kaimohu in 1972, but an inspection in 1977 and subsequent
visits revealed none.  
    The Bush Wren was about the size of a Goldfinch
(  Carduelis carduelis  ) - much larger than its close
relative the Rifleman, which is still common in many areas.
  Both birds have exceedingly short tails, virtually
invisible from a distance, which gives them a wren-like
appearance.   Both have fine bills for gleaning insects and
other arthropods.   The Bush Wren had particularly long
legs, hence the Latinised name   longipes  .   It was
a weak flier and is said to have been commonly seen among
foliage or feeding on the ground, and seen less often on the
trunks of trees than the Rifleman.  
    Bush Wrens apparently had a habit of bobbing their
head and body, especially on alighting, as does another close
relative, the Rock Wren (  Xenicus gilviventris  ).
  Nests were hidden in cavities among tree roots or in
fallen logs or clumps of fern.   Both parents incubated the
eggs and fed the nestlings.   Bush Wrens had no song, but
gave faint rasping sounds as they moved about or loud cheeps
of alarm.  
      Stephens Island Wren       (Figure
29)  
    The Stephens Island Wren (  Traversia lyalli  ),
as the name suggests, was found historically on this one small
island in the Cook Strait area.   However, subfossil bones
of this species have now been found at several sites on both
the North and South Islands, demonstrating that the Stephens
Island population was a relict of a formerly widespread
species.  
    The story goes that this bird was both discovered, and
soon after eliminated, by a lighthouse keeper 's cat.   Late
in 1894 A.W. Bethune, second engineer on the  photo  
  caption  
government steamer Hinemoa, showed Walter Buller some bird
skins from Stephens Island which he procured when his boat
visited the island in connection with the new lighthouse.
  Among the birds was a Stephens Island Wren brought in by a
cat.   Buller recognised it as a new species and wrote a
paper, published in Britain in April 1895, naming it
  Xenicus insularis  .   Meanwhile the cat had caught
more wrens.   One of the lighthouse keepers, David Lyall,
sent them to the dealer Henry Travers, who sold nine specimens
to Walter Rothschild in Britain, for what the latter regarded
as a high price.   Rothschild 's paper describing the new
species (  lyalli  ) and placing it in the new genus
  Traversia   (both names honouring his associates)
appeared in December 1894.   By the international rules of
zoological nomenclature, Rothschild 's name had priority over
Buller 's, much to the latter 's annoyance at the time.
  Lyall twice saw the bird alive and was seemingly the only
European to do so.   About 17 specimens were collected, all
at the end of 1894, and a dozen of these are still available
in museums.  
    The wings were short and rounded, the body plumage
soft, loose and rail-like.   Recent research by Phil
Millener has shown that the Stephens Island Wren had such
reduced wings as to be totally flightless - the only such
perching bird (passerine) known.   Lyall reported that the
wrens ran about like mice.   They were said to live among
rocks.  
      OLD WORLD WARBLERS    
    The Sylviidae is a large family of small song-birds,
largely restricted to the Old World.   They have fine
pointed bills for catching insects, and most are drab in
colour, especially in temperate areas.   The only
representatives in New Zealand are the two species of
fernbird, which are closely related to the grassbirds
(  Megalurus  ) of Australia.  
      Chatham Island Fernbird    
    Fernbirds are about the size of House Sparrows.
  They have long tails, the feathers of which have a loose,
tufted, spiky appearance.   In the Chatham Island Fernbird
(  Bowdleria rufescens  ) the throat and breast are
white without conspicuous spots, and the upper parts are
reddish-brown.   In the mainland species (  Bowdleria
punctata  ) the throat and breast are heavily spotted and
the upper parts brownish.  
    In 1868 Charles Traill discovered this species on
Mangere Island in the Chatham group.   He saw a small bird
in the undergrowth and killed it with a stone.   Walter
Buller examined the specimen and described it as new in 1869.
  Fernbirds were also recorded on Pitt Island where burning
and introduced cats may have been factors in their demise.
  Bones have been recorded in subfossil sites, including
kitchen middens, and these establish the former occurrence of
the species on Chatham island itself.   The last museum
specimen was shot on Mangere Island by one of Lord
Rothschild 's collectors.   The species has been extinct
since about 1900.  
    The Chatham Island Fernbird presumably had habits much
like its mainland relative, which inhabits low dense
vegetation at the edges of swamps and tidal inlets.   It
flies weakly and always remains close to cover.   They are
strongly territorial.   The male and female have short
metallic-sounding calls to keep contact in dense cover.  
      HONEYEATERS    
    Honeyeaters (family Meliphagidae) are important and
distinctive birds of the Australasian region.   They eat
insects, fruit and nectar&semi; for feeding on nectar they have
brush-tipped tongues.   The approximately 170 species vary
greatly in size, shape and the ecological niche they occupy.
  There are three species in New Zealand: Tui
(  Prosthemadera novaeseelandiae  ), Stitchbird
(  Notiomystis cincta  ) and Bellbird.  
          Extinct subspecies:     CHATHAM ISLAND
BELLBIRD   Anthornis melanura melanocephala  .    
    The Chatham Island race of the New Zealand Bellbird was
larger than its mainland counterpart and had some minor
differences in plumage.   In the 1870s it was present
throughout the Chatham group, and the song was said to be even
richer than on the mainland.   The last birds were seen on
Little Mangere Island in 1906.  
        NEW ZEALAND WATTLEBIRDS      
    This family of song-birds - the Callaeidae - is unique
to New Zealand.   There are three species: Kokako,
Saddleback (  Philesturnus carunculatus  ) and Huia.
  They may be closely related to the starlings (family
Sturnidae), which the Saddleback and male Huia resemble in
head shape, or they may be related to the Piopio, which is in
the bowerbird family.   They are not related to the
Australian wattlebirds, which are honeyeaters.  
    New Zealand wattlebirds get their name from the pair
of fleshy wattles at the gape, one on each side.   The
wattles are smallest in juveniles and largest in adult males,
so they probably help to communicate the age and breeding
status of individuals.   Their wings are rounded and they do
not fly strongly, but the legs are very powerful with strong
claws, which suit these birds for a largely tree-dwelling
existence in the deep forest.   They use their strong bills
to probe for insects, especially large insects in decaying
wood.   They also take berries, and the Kokako eats
significant amounts of young leaves.  
          Extinct subspecies:     SOUTH ISLAND
KOKAKO   Callaeas cinerea cinerea  .    
    There have been recent reports of this bird from Stewart Island
but they remain unconfirmed.   Otherwise it has not been reliably
recorded for 40 years and may be extinct.   At the time of
European settlement the South Island Kokako occurred widely in
forested areas of the South Island and on Stewart Island.
  The North Island Kokako (  Callaeas cinerea
wilsoni  ) persists in remanent forest of the northern
North Island and has been successfully transferred to Little
Barrier Island.   It has blue wattles and is sometimes
called the Blue-wattled Crow.   The South Island race
(Orange-wattled Crow) has orange wattles.  
      Huia       (Figures 30, 31)  
    The Huia (  Heteralocha acutirostris  ) is about
the size of an Australian Magpie (  Gymnorhina
tibicen  ).   It is the only bird known in which the bill
of the male and   sketch    caption  
  photo    caption  
female are radically different in shape, that of the female
being much longer (up to 104 mm) and therefore more curved
than the male 's (up to about 60 mm).   This suggests that
the sexes were specialised for feeding in very different ways.
  Naturalists who watched Huias feeding recorded that the
male tended to chisel at the outer surfaces of decaying or
live wood, whereas the female was able to probe deeply into
soft wood or crevices to retrieve insects unobtainable to the
male.   Pairs seemed to co-operate in their search for food,
the diet comprising insects, spiders and berries.   Recent
study of the anatomy of the Huia 's head and neck has shown
that the male had a capacity for forceful 'gaping' - inserting
his bill into rotting wood and forcing his beak open to split
the wood.  
      Subfossil bones of the Huia have been found only
in the North Island, at cave and dune sites from North Cape to
the Wellington area.   However, during the period of
European settlement Huias were recorded only in the southern
part of the island - from the Raukumara Range and Turakina
River south to Wellington.   This suggests that the species
declined between the arrival of Polynesians in New Zealand and
the arrival of Europeans.   As well as eating Huias - many
of the dune sites at which Huia bones occur are possibly
kitchen middens - the Maori prized their beaks and tall
feathers for ornamentation.   The first published reference
to the Huia was in the Reverend William Yate 's   Account of
New Zealand   (1835), which was rather late given that many
New Zealand birds were collected on Cook 's voyages.   The
male and female Huias were described and named as separate
species in 1837, an error which became apparent later.
  There have been no reliable sightings of the Huia since a
W.W. Smith saw three on 28 December 1907.  
    The writings of New Zealand naturalists of the late
    ninteenth    nineteenth     century indicate
that the Huia kept to the depths of the forest, moving about
mainly on foot, whether on the ground or in the canopy, and
flying weakly.   The name 'huia' is thought to be an
onomatopoeic rendition of the alarm call, which was a shrill
whistle.   Little is known about the Huia 's breeding.
  The saucer-shaped nest was large, as expected for so large
a bird - about 35 cm across with a smaller depression lined
with fine material for the eggs.   The breeding season was
early summer when most birds breed.   Two to four eggs were
laid, each about 45 mm by 30 mm, and they were greyish with
brown and purplish markings.  
    Towards the end of last century the Huia was one of
New Zealand 's best-known birds internationally, and whereas
today it would have been the subject of widely shown
television wildlife programmes, in those days natural history
museums and private collectors throughout the world sought to
purchase mounted specimens for display.   Collectors with
hunting rifles were probably a significant factor in finishing
off so tame a bird at a time when it was already declining as
a result of habitat clearance and the effect of introduced
predators.  
    Regulations of February 1892 made it illegal to kill
or take Huias in any part of New Zealand, but enforcement was
another matter.   Legend has it that when the Duke of York
(later King George V) visited Rotorua in 1902, a Maori guide
gave him a Huia 's tail feather which he wore in his hatband,
creating an immediate craze which pushed the price of the
feathers to one pound a piece.   Each Huia had 12 tail
feathers, as is typical of most song-birds.   The feathers
were openly traded by jewellers and second-hand dealers as
late as the 1930s.  
    In 1921 G.E. Mason published a report on five ticks
which he found attached to one of the wattles of a Huia
collected near Masterton in 1883.   The ticks belonged to
two species present in India and it has been surmised that
they travelled to New Zealand with Common Mynas
(  Acridotheres tristis  ), which were introduced from
India in 1875.   The ticks may have transmitted a disease to
Huias.      
  

        New Zealand 's record of Mesozoic life - Age
of Reptiles      
    The Mesozoic era consists of three periods and spans
the time between two major episodes of mass extinction,
235 million years ago and 65 million years ago.   It is
commonly known as the age of reptiles, for during this time
large and fierce-looking reptiles such as dinosaurs and sea
dragons dominated life on land and in the sea.  
    Sedimentary rocks that accumulated during the Mesozoic
are common in many parts of New Zealand, and include most of
the hard greywacke rocks of the main ranges in both islands.
  Locally abundant fossils preserve an excellent record of
the marine life which had hard parts and inhabited the seas of
the New Zealand region at this time.   Fossilised remains of
plants and animals that lived on land are much less common,
especially those of Triassic and Jurassic age.  
    The small number of sea animals that survived the mass
extinctions at the end of the Paleozoic soon developed into a
myriad of new forms in the Triassic period.   Most abundant
of those found fossil in our Mesozoic rocks are the bivalves
or clams, followed by lampshells, belemnites, and less common
ammonites, snails, sea eggs, sea lilies, bryozoa, worms and
reptiles.   Rocks rich in marine fossils of Triassic and
Jurassic age are frequently found in a belt on the west side
of the North Island between Port Waikato and Awakino, and also
in northern Southland in a belt between Te Anau and the
Catlins coast.   Rocks rich in Triassic fossils also occur
southeast of Nelson city.  
  photo  
    During the Triassic the New Zealand region was mostly
under the sea, off the south coast of the
super    continent of Gondwana.   Areas that may
have been land, like northwest Nelson, were the most southerly
and coolest parts of the great continent and this may explain
why no fossil remains of dinosaurs or their land-dwelling
ancestors have been found in our Triassic and Jurassic
rocks.   Similarly ammonites lived abundantly in warm
tropical seas, but their sparseness as fossils in New Zealand
rocks is confirmation of our cool climate throughout most of
the Mesozoic.  
    Throughout the late Paleozoic and Mesozoic the New
Zealand region lay along the collision boundary between two
great crustal plates of the earth - the Gondwanan and Pacific.
  Initially, during the Permian, Triassic and early
Jurassic, a vast thickness of sediments (tens of
kilometres thick) accumulated on the subsiding floor of the
sea in our area and a chain of volcanoes or volcanic islands
erupted intermittently nearby.   These sediments were
carried by earth movement (subduction) deep into the
earth, where they were hardened into greywacke or
metamorphosed into schist.  
    About 150 million years ago, towards the end of the
Jurassic period, the downward movement of the Pacific plate
became jammed beneath the leading edge of the Gondwanan plate.
  The collision between the two plates was translated into a
buckling upwards along the boundary and much of the sea floor
and underlying rocks were pushed up to form land in the New
Zealand region.   By the Cretaceous period a huge land,
about half the size of modern Australia, had been formed.
  It extended from New Caledonia through New Zealand to the
Chatham and Campbell Islands.   Many Gondwanan animals and
plants moved into the New Zealand region at this time.
  Examples include the ancestors of the tuatara, our endemic
frogs, moas, kiwis, our large snails and giant wetas.  
    Thus during the early Cretaceous almost all of New
Zealand was land.   Marine rocks and fossils of this age are
virtually absent.   By the middle Cretaceous, some 90
million years ago, Gondwana was beginning to break apart and
rifts began opening up between Australia and New Zealand.
  During the latter part of the Cretaceous and into the
early Tertiary (between 80 and 55 million years ago), New
Zealand split away from Gondwana forming the Tasman Sea we
know today and some of the southern ocean between us and
Antarctica.   Ancestral marsupials, land mammals and snakes
evolved in Gondwana, in the late Cretaceous
  photos    captions   and early Tertiary, just too
late to reach New Zealand before we moved away.  
    As New Zealand split away, parts of the region began
to subside.   In the area between East Cape and Wairarapa
and south to Marlborough, sediment accumulated on the
floor of the encroaching sea preserving abundant fossil
bivalves, belemnites, lampshells and snails, together with
occasional mosasaurs, plesiosaurs and rare dinosaurs,
washed in from the adjacent land.   The land was being
worn down by erosion.   Thick beds of coal, river silt and
gravels accumulated, in large swamps and alluvial plains, in
south Otago, Westland, northwest Nelson and offshore Taranaki.
  Many of these late Cretaceous rocks now exposed at the
surface contain beds rich in fossil leaves, wood and
occasional freshwater mussels.  
    Suddenly at the of the Cretaceous, 65 million years
ago, the largest known world-wide extinction event took place.
  It killed off all the dinosaurs, flying reptiles and sea
dragons.   All the ammonites and belemnites too became
extinct.   It greatly reduced the number and variety of
almost all groups of animals and plants, whether they lived on
land or in the sea.   Indeed three-quarters of all living
creatures are believed to have died out.   There have been
many postulated explanations over the years but the most
likely cause was the collision of an asteroid (10-15km across)
with the earth.   This would have created thick dust clouds
that encircled the globe, shutting out sunlight and
thereby killing off many plants on land and in the sea.
  Animals that relied on these plants for food would have
died from starvation, as would the predators that lived on
them.   Evidence of this major extinction at the end of
the Mesozoic can be studied in the fossils preserved in rock
sequences in Marlborough and the Wairarapa.  
  captions  
  photos  
        Fossil clams - bivalves      
    Bivalves are a large group within the phylum
Mollusca.   All possess two valves (shells) hinged
together at the top and enclosing the soft parts.   This
group includes such well known delicacies as scallop, oyster,
mussel, toheroa, cockle and clam.   In addition to their two
valves they also differ from other molluscs, such as snails,
squid and chitons, by the lack of a head and the possession of
a compressed, fleshy tongue-like foot that projects through
the gape of the shells when it is feeding or moving.  
    All bivalves live in the sea except for freshwater
mussels.   Most are found on the sea floor as sluggish
crawlers, burrowers in soft sediment, borers in rock or fixed
by holdfasts or cement to solid objects.   A few, such as
scallops, are capable of swimming short distances.  
    The hard bivalve shells are readily preserved and
fossilised.   The oldest bivalves are found in middle
Cambrian rocks (eg. Trilobite Rock) and they gradually
evolved into a diversity of forms throughout the Paleozoic.
  By the Triassic, they had increased in abundance in
the New Zealand region to succeed the lampshells as the
dominant group of invertebrates living on the sea floor.
  Indeed throughout the Mesozoic, bivalves are the most
abundant and important group of fossils in New Zealand.
  The evolving succession of bivalves are used as the basis
for dividing up the Mesozoic era in New Zealand into 22
different time zones.  
    In New Zealand 's Tertiary sedimentary rocks, bivalves
remain abundant and jointly dominate the bigger fossils with
their cousins, the sea snails (gastropods).   Some
fossil bivalves are also important in determining the age of
Tertiary rocks in New Zealand, especially the rapidly evolving
scallops and fanshells (pectinids) of the late
Tertiary.  
  photos  
  captions  
  illustrations  
  captions  
  photo  
  caption  
        Dinosaurs      
    Dinosaurs are children 's favourite group of extinct
animals and fossils.   They evolved in the late Triassic,
about 200 million years ago, and ruled the land during the
Jurassic and Cretaceous, until their dramatic die out 65
million years ago at the end of the Mesozoic.   Some
dinosaurs were vegetarians and grew to huge sizes, whereas
others were ferocious predators.   Most lived in the
Northern Hemisphere with few reaching southern lands.  
    Until the 1980s dinosaur and pterosaur (flying
reptile) fossils were not known from New Zealand.   In
recent years a dedicated amateur paleontologist, Joan Wiffen,
and her friends have made numerous exciting fossil discoveries
in the late Cretaceous rocks of inland Hawkes Bay.   These
include mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, turtles, and single bones of a
pterosaur and two dinosaurs - a carnivorous theropod and a 5m
long herbivorous hypsilophodont.  
  caption    photo  
        Sea dragons - ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs and
mosasaurs      
    Mesozoic seas were dominated by large swimming
reptiles or sea dragons.   The oldest group were the fish
lizards or ichthyosaurs that flourished in the Triassic and
Jurassic periods.   They resembled large dolphins with
numerous big teeth in their long jaws.   Fossilised
ichthyosaur bones have been found in Triassic rocks in inland
Canterbury and the Hokonui Hills of northern
Southland.  
    In the Cretaceous, ichthyosaurs were displaced in
their dominance of the seas by mosasaurs (sea lizards) and
plesiosaurs (sea serpents).   Mosasaurs were up to 15m long
and resembled modern monitor lizards.   They were probably
the most ferocious predators of Mesozoic seas.   Plesiosaurs
were of similar length to mosasaurs but had much broader
bodies, long powerful paddle-like flippers and often a
long neck.   The legendary Loch Ness monster is "modelled"
on a plesiosaur.   Fossil bones and some spectacular
complete skeletons of both plesiosaurs and mosasaurs have been
excavated from late Cretaceous rocks in Hawkes Bay,
Marlborough, North Canterbury and North Otago.  
    Like the dinosaurs, these giant sea dragons also died
out at the end of the Mesozoic.  
  photo  
  illustration  
  captions  
      photos  
  captions    
        Ammonites and belemnites - shell-bearing
squid      
    Ammonites and belemnites are two well known groups of
extinct marine animals that are commonly found fossilised in
New Zealand 's Mesozoic rocks.   Both belong to the group of
Mollusca called Cephalopoda, which includes modern octopus,
squid and cuttlefish.   All cephalopods have a ring of
tentacles or arms around the mouth and a funnel through which
water can be squirted to help propel them through the
water.  
    The oldest groups of fossil cephalopods (the
nautiloids and ammonoids) had external, chambered shells
with a large final chamber into which the animal could
withdraw all its soft parts and tentacles.   The nautiloids
(which have lived from the Cambrian to the present day) differ
from the ammonoids (Silurian to Cretaceous) in the shape of
the wall (septa) between chambers.   In nautiloids the wall
is a simple curve but in ammonoids it becomes folded and
frilled towards the margin and this difference is readily seen
in fossils.   Nautiloids had their greatest variety of forms
in the Ordovician and have been in decline ever since.
  They are now near extinction, being represented only by
the modern pearly Nautilus.   The first nautiloids had
small, conical shells but as time passed these evolved into
the flat, planispiral shells of all Mesozoic, Tertiary and
modern forms.   Occasional fossil nautiloids are found in
New Zealand 's Paleozoic and Tertiary rocks.  
    Ammonoids appeared in the Silurian and had four great
bursts of evolution (Devonian, Carboniferous-Permian,
Triassic, Jurassic-Cretaceous) when many forms developed.
  Each burst was followed by a major die out with the loss
of a large part of the Ammonoid fauna.   Most ammonoids have
tightly-coiled shells but short-lived straight or
partly-coiled forms evolved on several occasions.   During
the Paleozoic, and into the Mesozoic, forms gradually evolved
with more and more complexly-folded and frilled chamber walls.
  Those with the most intricately folded walls are the
ammonites of Triassic to Cretaceous age.  
    Ammonites frequently form the nucleus inside
concretions in the rocks.   Scattered, usually
poorly-preserved, Permian ammonoid fossils occur in
Marlborough and Southland.   Much better preserved Mesozoic
ammonites have frequently been found around the Kaipara
Harbour, Port Waikato, Kawhia Harbour, Wairarapa, Hokonui
Hills and Catlins coast of northern Southland.  
    Belemnites are the ancestors of modern squid and
cuttlefish and are distinguished from them by the presence
of a hard, bullet-shaped, internal skeleton of calcite, called
the guard, located inside the tail.   Belemnites
appeared in the late Paleozoic, but they are most abundant,
overseas and in New Zealand rocks, in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous.   They became extinct by the early Tertiary.
  When the belemnite squid died, it sank to the sea floor,
the flesh decayed and only the hard guard survived to be
fossilised.   They are common fossils in the Port Waikato,
Kawhia, Wairarapa, Haumuri Bluff (Kaikoura coast) and
Hokonui Hills areas.  
    Nautiloids, ammonoids and belemnites were mostly
free-swimming animals that easily spread throughout the
world 's seas.   They also evolved rapidly into many
different, short-lived forms (especially the ammonites).
  Thus they are particularly useful in accurately
recognising rocks of the same age world-wide.  
  photos  
  captions  
          Mesozoic plants      
    The ferns which were so abundant on the New Zealand
margin of Gondwana in the late Paleozoic were followed in the
Mesozoic by common conifers, palms and later flowering plants.
  The main canopy trees in the Triassic and Jurassic forests
were conifers and broadleaved ginkgos.   Seed ferns, cycad
palms, tree ferns, horsetails and lycopods comprised much of
the understorey shrub layer.   Judging by their abundant
spores, mosses and liverworts were more common in the Mesozoic
than they are today.  
    Major changes occurred in New Zealand 's vegetation
and worldwide in the Cretaceous with the appearance of the
first flowering plants (Angiosperms).   They evolved
rapidly into many varieties and had become the dominant plant
group by the late Cretaceous and have remained so ever since.
  By the end of the Cretaceous the ancestors of many modern
plants had appeared.   By this time the southern beeches
(  Nothofagus  ) and proteas had become common and
diverse in New Zealand.   Nevertheless two different groups
of conifers, the podocarps and araucarians, remained
common.  
    Throughout most of the Mesozoic, New Zealand 's flora
shared a lot in common with other Southern Hemisphere
countries that were then all still part of Gondwana.
  Towards the end of the Cretaceous, New Zealand 's plants
began to evolve independently of other countries, as we split
away from the supercontinent.  
    Our knowledge of New Zealand 's Mesozoic plants comes
mostly from study of their abundant fossil spores and pollen.
  Wood, leaves and seeds are less common but provide more
graphic evidence of our ancient vegetation.   Triassic plant
macrofossils are mostly poorly preserved leaves and wood
fragments.   The best of these are found in rocks at Mt
Potts and Benmore Dam (both South Canterbury).  
    Better preserved plant macrofossils come from New
Zealand 's Jurassic rocks, especially from Port Waikato (South
Auckland), Curio Bay (Southland) and the Clent Hills
(Canterbury).   Common Cretaceous plant fossils can readily
be found at places such as Pakawau (northwest Nelson),
Paparoa Ranges (Westland), Malvern Hills (Canterbury), Shag
Point (North Otago) and Ohai (Southland).   Peat swamps were
common features of the low-lying landscape of the late
Cretaceous.      
  

      Meat-eating Dinosaurs: The Theropods    
    The land reptiles that are known as the  'dinosaurs' can
be grouped into two large orders: Order Saurischia and Order
Ornithischia.   Both groups were derived from ancestral
reptiles (the thecodonts) during late Permian and Triassic
times (260-205 million years ago), and they soon became the
dominant reptiles of the Mesozoic era, particularly in the
Northern Hemisphere.   Ornithischia have bird-like hip bones
(see following section), whereas saurischian ('lizard-hipped')
dinosaurs have typical reptilian hip bones.   Saurischian
hips are characterised by a three-pronged pattern of pelvic
bones, which provided support areas for large leg-moving
muscles, enabling them to walk and run efficiently.
  Saurischians can be separated into meat-eating
(carnivorous) and plant-eating (herbivorous) forms, but it is
the carnivorous forms belonging to the Suborder Theropoda that
are the best known.  
    The theropods ('beast-feet') included reptiles that
were the great carnivores of the Mesozoic.   They first
appeared in mid-Triassic times, 240-230 million years ago, and
quickly developed into a highly diverse group of predators that
fed on many different things.   Some forms were quite small,
slender and lightly built (the coelurosaurians) but others
reached very large sizes (the carnosaurs or 'flesh-lizards'),
culminating in the most formidable theropod of all,
  Tyrannosaurus  , attaining a body length of 16 m and
having a skull 1.5 m long.  
    Theropods were very active and highly mobile hunters.
  They had powerful back legs and the proportions of their
individual leg bones (short femur and long tibia) were such
that they had a long running stride.   The hind feet had
three functional toes, armed with long claws.   Their
forelimbs were very small and had three clawed toes.   They
were presumably used for grasping food while it was being
eaten.   The theropods had large heads with strong powerful
jaws and a wide gape, and sabre-like teeth were socketed into
the jaw margins.   Being entirely flesh eaters, their main
food was the various plant-eating dinosaurs of their times.
  They had strong muscular tails that served as a prop to the
body when they were standing upright, but when they were
running it was probably carried stretched out in a horizontal
position, to maintain balance.   Because the theropods
reigned supreme on land at the time, and consequently had
little fear of attack, only the larger types had armoured skin,
and then only on their upper surfaces.  
    Theropods lived on most continents of the world, and
reached their climax during Cretaceous times, 135-65 million
years ago.   Like most Mesozoic reptiles, they died out at
the end of the Cretaceous, at the time of world  -  wide
extinctions.  
    In New Zealand the evidence for the presence of
carnivorous theropods is very slender and rests on the
discovery of a single, but nonetheless very distinctive, caudal
vertebra described in 1981.   This vertebra (back bone) is
thought to have come from an animal about 4 m in length and
weighing about 400 kg.   The specimen was found in rocks of
late Cretaceous age in inland Hawkes Bay which had been
deposited on the sea floor between 87 and 65 million years ago.
  In addition, two further specimens have been found in rocks
of the same age in the same area: a very large toe bone and a
small toe bone, having both bird-like and theropod-like
characters.   Together, the two toe bones provide further
evidence for the presence of theropods.  
  The illustration opposite depicts a scene in the coastal
forest of inland Hawkes Bay, in late Cretaceous times, with a
meat-eating theropod dinosaur feeding off the carcass of a
plant-eating ornithopod dinosaur.  
  illustration  
      Plant-eating Dinosaurs: The
Ornithopods    
    The ornithischians represent the other great
subdivision of dinosaurs that were dominant in the Mesozoic
era.   They were all entirely plant-eating (herbivorous)
reptiles and some were bipedal (walking on two legs), whilst
others were     quadripedal    quadrupedal    
(walking on four legs).   Anatomically they were
distinguished from the saurischians (see preceding section) by
the unusual arrangement of their hip bones, which resembled
those of birds.   Hence they are often called 'bird-hipped'
dinosaurs.   They also had a specialised predentary bone on
the lower jaw as an adaption for browsing on tough and spikey
vegetation, and an arrangement of long bony tendons along the
backbone.  
    The bird-like hip of the ornithischians had a
four-branched pelvic structure in which the forked pubic bone
was reversed and lay parallel to the ischium (as it does in
living birds), and partly supported the stomach.   This
pelvic arrangement provided a strong base for muscle attachment
in the more bipedal forms, especially for the tail, and for
support (at the centre of gravity beneath the hip) of the large
stomach and digestive system that had to cope with the tough,
fibrous cellulose and resin-rich vegetation of the Mesozoic
era.  
    The ornithopods (or 'bird-feet') were a group of mostly
small-sized ornithischians, most of which were bipedal.
  Although they superficially resembled many of the bipedal
carnivorous theropods, they were not as erect as them and had
more of a perching stance on the ground, and perhaps browsed by
means of moving about on all fours.   Nonetheless, they were
reasonably mobile dinosaurs and their long hind legs gave them
speed and agility which was often their only defence against
predatory theropods, as their bodies were not armoured.   The
head structures of the ornithopods were adapted for browsing
and for the cropping of vegetation.   Simple teeth at the
front of the upper jaw bit against a sharp, toothless,
crescent-shaped horny 'beak' at the tip of the lower jaw,
resembling the beak of turtles.   Fluted and expanded teeth
were positioned at the rear of the jaws for shearing and
chewing of vegetation.   In contrast to the carnivorous
dinosaurs, the articulation of the jaw was not at the back of
the skull but rather some distance forward.   Thus whilst the
mouth opening was not as wide as in carnivores, the chewing of
tough vegetation using a circular grinding motion was more
easily accomplished.   Ornithopods possessed strong cheek
muscles and some forms may also have had cheek pouches in which
to retain food balls.   The front legs were half the length
of the hind legs and most possessed a 5-fingered, clawed
'hand', with the 5th finger being small and at right angles to
the wrist.   These hands were capable of grasping vegetation
during browsing.   The hind foot had 4 functional clawed toes
with a 5th being reduced to a small size.  
    The New Zealand record of an ornithopod dinosaur
consists of a single fragment of an ilium (one of the pelvic
bones), collected from rocks of late Cretaceous age in inland
Hawkes Bay laid down in shallow seas between 87 and 65 million
years ago.   From such a fragment it is not easy to say what
form of ornithopod it represents, but generalised size
comparisons can be made with smaller forms like the
hypsilophodontids (1.5 - 2 m in length).   These were very
successful early Cretaceous ornithopods that lived in Europe,
North America and Australia.   It is thought that the New
Zealand fossil represents a small bipedal ornithopod dinosaur,
with a light skeleton and an overall length of about 2 m, and
bears a close similarity to members of the hypsilophodontid
genus   Dryosaurus  .  
    The illustration opposite shows small plant-eating
ornithopod dinosaurs browsing on the cycad-like vegetation of
the late Cretaceous coastal forests of Hawkes Bay.  
  illustration  
      Pterosaurs: Wing-Lizards    
    Pterosaurs were the great flying reptiles of the
Mesozoic era, and the first specialised flying vertebrates to
appear on earth.   They were probably warm-blooded and had a
history of development parallel to that of the birds and bats
that appeared later in geological time.   Pterosaurs probably
occupied many of the ecological niches that birds now fill.
  Because nearly all the remains of pterosaurs have been
found in marine deposits preserved on most of the continents of
the world (Europe, North and South America, Africa, Asia and
Australia), it is concluded that they were probably reasonably
common inhabitants of the coastline, using their large wing
membranes for soaring flight, and riding the offshore wind
currents, rather like the modern sea birds, particularly the
wandering albatross.   In their feeding habits they were
probably like pelicans, patrolling the coastal waters searching
for fish, which they scooped up from the surface of the
sea.  
    Pterosaurs had a long skull and slender 'beak', either
smooth-edged or armed with spiky teeth and probably with a fish
pouch beneath the lower jaw (rather like a pelican or a
cormorant).   The eyes were large, and the nostrils were set
well back on the beak.   The neck was short and flexible, and
the trunk short and compact to support the long wings.   The
tail was either short or long and stiff.   The skeleton was
light and delicate, but strong, with hollow air-filled
(pneumatic) bones (like those of birds) and a large breast bone
(sternum) on the ventral surface of the chest.   The
forelimbs were stout, with the upper arm and forearm attached
to a powerful shoulder girdle.   The fingers were modified to
support the long, narrow wing membrane&semi; the first 3 fingers
formed small curved claws, while the 4th was greatly elongated
in 4 jointed sections to support the wing membrane.
  Although the wing structure was only partly supported, it
is believed that the wing as a whole was capable of a flapping
motion, although soaring and gliding was probably the main mode
of flight.   Although bipedal, the hind limbs were splayed,
which would have given them an awkward gait when grounded, so
it is likely that they relied a lot on their wing claws for
climbing and mobility in general.   Like bats, pterosaurs
probably hung upside down when sleeping.   The body surfaces
of pterosaurs were covered with a fine hair, the presence of
which is used as evidence to support the probability that they
were warm-blooded.  
    The earliest remains of pterosaurs have been found in
Italy, in rocks of late Triassic age, 220-205 million years
old.   During Jurassic times, 205-135 million years ago,
pterosaurs became widespread in Europe and Africa and
short-tailed pterodactyl forms developed.   Pterosaur
development reached its peak in Cretaceous time, 135-65 million
years ago.   Large forms appeared, some the size of a light
aircraft.     Quetzalcoatlus   from Texas had an
estimated wing span of 15 metres.   These large forms,
grouped together as the '  Pteranodon   type', developed
a bony crest on the rear of the skull to act as a
counterbalance.   Like most reptiles of the Mesozoic, they
became extinct at the end of the Cretaceous time.  
    New Zealand 's first record of a pterosaur was described
in 1988, and is based on the end piece of a left fore-limb bone
(ulna) and a single tooth, obtained from late Cretaceous rocks
of inland Hawkes Bay laid down between 87 and 65 million years
ago.   Comparisons of this bone and tooth suggest that this
specimen had a wingspan of about 3.75 m and its relationships
may lie with the 'crestless' toothed pterosaurs from the
Cretaceous of South America.  
    The New Zealand record is the most southern (and is at
the highest Cretaceous latitude) of the three records of late
Cretaceous pterosaurs known from the Southern Hemisphere.  
    The scene opposite depicts two pterosaurs swooping down
from their cliff-top perches to feed from a shoal of fish off
the east coast of the North Island during late Cretaceous
times.  
  illustration  
      A Giant Cretaceous Fish:
Pachyrhizodus    
    The genus   Pachyrhizodus   is a distinctive and
large (1.5 m) surface-swimming predatory fish that was
widespread throughout the Cretaceous seas of the world, 135-65
million years ago.   Fossilised skeletal remains have been
recorded from rocks in England, Europe, North America, North
Africa, Australia and New Zealand.  
      Pachyrhizodus   belongs in one of several
families of fish that developed in the Cretaceous as an
offshoot from the main line of fish evolution and while it
shows some advanced characters (compared with those of the
smaller fish of the preceding Jurassic period), many relatively
primitive features are still present.  
      Pachyrhizodus   is notable for its bulky and
heavy body with large stout pectoral fins and an extremely
large sickle-shaped tail.   All these features point to a
powerful swimmer.   Each pectoral fin has a large stout spine
while the dorsal fin, pelvic fins and anal fin are fringed with
small spines.   The scales of   Pachyrhizodus   have a
very distinctive ornament, with a knobbly surface, and have a
triangular tip with a pattern of ridges.   There is also a
prominent scale bone above the gill cover plate (operculum),
and an enlarged scale is present in front of each of the paired
pectoral fins.   The jaw is rectangular in shape and rounded
in front.   There is a single row of large incurved conical
socketed teeth, which have expanded bases similar to those of
marine mosasaur reptiles.   There is a double row of teeth
inside the jaw edge.   The back bones (vertebrae) of
  Pachyrhizodus   are most distinctive, and are large and
straight-sided and in cross-section show a nearly solid bony
centre surrounded by two distinct bony rings and an outer layer
of spongy bone.  
      A fairly complete but disarticulated skeleton of
the largest species in the genus was found in New Zealand in
1983.   This specimen was collected from rocks of late
Cretaceous age (87-65 million years old) in inland Hawkes Bay.
  Jaw bones and teeth, vertebrae, fins and other internal
bones are preserved.  
    The rarity of this fish as a fossil in New Zealand -
only this one specimen has been found to date - may well be a
reflection of its preferred deep-water environment, which is
not well represented by exposed Cretaceous sediments in New
Zealand.  
    The illustration opposite is a reconstruction of
  Pachyrhizodus caninus  , the large carnivorous fish
with reptilian jaws, that lived in the seas covering the east
coast of the North Island during late Cretaceous
times.      
  

      Coromandel stag beetle  
"  Dorcus  " sp.  
    Stag beetles are among the world 's largest beetles,
and they occur almost worldwide.   They are called stag
beetles because of the grotesque development of their
mandibles (jaws) which, in some species, resemble the shape of
deer antlers.   The enlarged mandibles, which are supported
by an equally large head, are found only in the males.  
    Stag beetles are closely related to scarab beetles,
whose males are also often adorned with large horn- and
tusk-like structures.   However, those of scarab beetles are
immobile parts of the head and body, whereas the structures of
stag beetles are independently movable mandibles.   The
mandibles are not used for biting or chewing food as with
other beetles, as the stag beetle feeds on moisture and sap
using a brush-shaped group of bristles.   Fanciful stories
abound as to the use and purpose of these mandibles but few
observations have been made of any of the stag beetles.
  They are occasionally seen fighting, and some specimens
carry spike marks on their bodies.  
    There are at least seven species of "  Dorcus  "
in New Zealand, all adapted to burrowing by having a flattish
body, digging legs, and grooves along either side of the head
to fit and protect the right-angled antennae.   The eyes are
almost divided and the beetles can probably see equally well
above and below, detecting movement from almost any direction.
  New Zealand stag beetles have some unique features and are
flightless, with only vestiges of membranous wings.  
    The Coromandel stag beetle is a rare and as-yet
undescribed species.   In general appearance it is similar
to "  Dorcus  "   auriculatus  , a protected
species found in the northern Bay of Plenty, and until
recently it was thought to be that species.   The only other
protected stag beetle is "  Dorcus  "
  ithaginis  , a species about 22 millimetres long.
  It is restricted to the Mokohinau Islands, where it has
been described as burrowing through the peat-like layer formed
by horokaka, the succulent plant   Disphyma
australe  .  
  photo  
        Helms'   stag beetle  
"  Dorcus  "   helmsi    
      Helms'   stag beetle is New Zealand 's largest
and most imposing stag beetle.   The combined length of its
body and jaws can reach 42 millimetres, and it can be 20
millimetres wide, but today it reaches this size only on
rat-free islands.   The mainland forms are considerably
smaller, seldom reaching even 30 millimetres, and the huge
jaws are proportionately reduced.   Females lack the large
mandibles of the male, but are readily distinguished from
other beetles by their elbowed antennae, a feature typical of
most stag beetles.   Although recorded along the western
length of the South Island,   Helms'   stag beetles are
more often found in the high-rainfall forests of South
Westland and Fiordland, where they are occasionally seen
during the day around the bases of large kahikatea or feeding
on sap exuding from tree trunks.   This behaviour exposes
the beetles to rats and may explain why they are more frequent
in wetter forests that are least suitable for ship rats.
  Eggs are laid in crevices of wet and decaying wood, and
the hatching larvae, which resemble the C-shaped grass-grub
beetle, feed on the wood of rotting logs, stumps, and roots.
  Once fully grown, the larvae pupate within cells made from
wood particles and earth.   Development from egg to beetle
takes several years, and adult beetles live beyond 2 years.
  On islands in Fiordland, all stages of the life cycle have
been observed in the rotting stumps and roots of
  Dracophyllum  .  
    When faced with both new predators and habitats
modified by humans or mammals, it would appear that the loss
of flight, coupled with other factors such as large body size,
has brought about the demise of many New Zealand
"  Dorcus  " stag beetles.   In contrast,   Lucanus
cervus  , the huge, night-flying, 75-millimetre-long stag
beetle of central Europe, is locally spread over the southern
half of England and is not uncommon in the London suburbs!  
  photo  
      Marlborough ground beetle  
  Megadromus   sp.  
    Ground beetles, often known as carabids, have a
worldwide distribution and are one of the most common
beetles.  
    New Zealand ground beetles are usually black, although
some have a metallic red or green sheen.   The large species
have no wings and their hardened wingcases are fused.  
    As with most ground beetles, the Marlborough ground
beetle is found during the day under stones and logs,
especially in moist forest.   They are carnivorous and hunt
at night for their prey of soft-bodied grubs, caterpillars,
snails, and slugs.   They are sometimes seen out during
heavily overcast days in summer, when kingfishers sometimes
catch and feed them to their nestlings.   The Marlborough
ground beetle is heavily preyed on by rodents, hedgehogs,
stoats, and wild pigs.   Some ground beetles overseas, such
as the bombardier beetles of Europe, defend themselves by
ejecting a volatile substance which explodes on contact with
the air, burning the attacker with nitrous acid.
  Unfortunately, New Zealand 's ground beetles have not
developed a defence against mammals.   They attempt to
defend themselves by ejecting foul-smelling secretions from
the anal gland.   But these chemical compounds are primarily
for defence against infection by bacteria and fungi, and
protect the beetle only by making the immediate environment
more acidic.  
    Late in summer the female ground beetle, like other
  Megadromus   species, lays her eggs in a cell in the
ground and stays with them until they are large enough to
catch their own prey.   The larvae overwinter and pupate in
earthen cells.   They have a life cycle of 2-3 years.  
    Some ground beetles, such as   Maoripamborus  
with its slender head and thorax, are modified to feed
exclusively on snails, and possibly the Marlborough ground
beetle does also.   This could be one reason it is so
scarce, since the few places in Marlborough where this beetle
is found were once the home of thriving numbers of
  Powelliphanta   snails (see p. 74).   The largest
ground beetle,   Mecodema punctellum  , is endemic to
Stephens Island, and is considered to be extinct.   It may
have been forced to extinction with the loss of large land
snails when the forest on the island was cleared.  
  photo  
      Cook Strait amychus     Amychus
granulatus     
      Chatham Island amychus     Amychus
candezi    
      Amychus   beetles belong to the same family as
click beetles and skipjacks (which are better known as
wireworms - the larval stage of click beetles).   A few
click beetles are infamous pests of pasture and garden because
they eat roots and crops.   Others feed only on dead wood,
and many of the native species are predators and even
cannibals.   One group of tropical fireflies are click
beetles.  
    Click beetles are so named because of their ability to
right themselves by click-snapping their body segments and
leaping vertically up to 200 millimetres.   This device may
also act as a means of escape.  
      Amychus   beetles have lost the ability to
"click" but like so many endemic New Zealand insects they have
retained many primitive characteristics.   They have long
lost the ability to fly, and grow larger than is usual in most
temperate climates.   The bark-like beetles are usually
found from September to April in crevices in rocks and under
logs and stones.   The larvae are thought to feed on the
roots of forest trees and shrubs, and take several years to
develop before pupating in the soil.   The adults browse
algae and lichens on tree trunks at night.  
      Amychus   beetles are isolated on widely
separated island groups and have never been found on the
mainland.   Their distribution on the Three Kings Islands
and Chatham Islands is an indication that they are ancient
relicts, but their distribution on a few Cook Strait islands
is difficult to explain.  
    Many rare and endangered species are now restricted to
islands, and the main causes of their decline are destruction
of the forests and predation by introduced animals such as
rats.  
    Despite the removal of much of the forest last century
on Stephens Island and The Brothers in Cook Strait,
  Amychus   beetles were reported as "abundant" 50 years
ago.   Today they are regarded as rare on both islands,
although there has been little apparent change in the
vegetation since then.   A recent increase in the number of
tuataras present may account for the large decline in the
number of beetles.  
  photo  
      Cromwell chafer beetle  
  Prodontria lewisi    
    This beetle was first collected in about 1900 at
Cromwell, and it is restricted to that area.   Belonging to
the family Scarabaeidae, the Cromwell chafer is related to the
common grass-grub beetle, and more distantly to the sand
scarab, and the sacred scarabs of Egypt.   However, unlike
most of their relatives, the New Zealand species of
  Prodontria   are all flightless, and they are found
from Otago Lakes and Central Otago to the southern tip of
Stewart Island.  
    The Cromwell chafer beetle lives only in scarcely
modified stretches of shallow loamy sand in the Clutha-Kawarau
junction.   The adult beetles emerge at night from August to
January, and are frequently most numerous in October.
  During this time they feed on scabweed, sorrell, and
various other weeds.   Before daybreak they bury themselves
at the bases of silver tussock (  Poa laevis  ) to half
a metre deep.   The larvae feed on the roots of silver
tussock and have a life cycle of more than a year.   The
habitat of the Cromwell chafer has been reduced to about 100
hectares by the activities and construction of
  photo   
a hydro-dam and township.   As well as this destruction of
sand-dune habitat, overgrazing by rabbits has destroyed much
of the important tussock-scabweed associations.
  Ironically, the chafer 's most serious predator, the little
owl, was introduced from Europe during 1906-10 to control
orchard birds.   Examination of little owl castings has
shown that Cromwell chafer beetles make up about 10 percent of
their summer diet.   Other likely predators, all introduced,
are hedgehogs, blackbirds, and thrushes.  
    A reserve of 81 hectares was established for the
Cromwell chafer during 1982-83.   Extensive areas nearby and
in adjacent valleys have been surveyed, but no further
populations of the beetle have been found.  
    Two related species are found in nearby Alexandra.
    Prodontria modesta   lives in sandy loam but not
in sand.     P. bicolorata  , the Alexandra chafer, is
also threatened because of land development for horticulture
and housing.  
  photo  
      Flax weevil     Anagotus
fairburni    
    Of all the large flightless weevils in New Zealand the
flax weevil is probably the best known, even though it was not
discovered until 1931, at the northern end of D'Urville
Island.   Once widespread throughout New Zealand, it is now
mainly confined to rat-free islands, from the Poor Knights,
Hen and Chickens group in the north to Fiordland in the south.
  Although usually considered a coastal species, it has
recently been found in the Tararua Range living on mountain
flax (  Phormium cookianum  )&semi; other remnant populations
probably survive above the bushline in other mountain
ranges.  
    The flax weevil 's life history is tied to the flax
plant (  Phormium   species).   The adults hide
amongst the dead leaves and debris at the bases of the plants
during the day and come out to feed soon after dusk.   They
feed on the youngest leaves, chewing characteristic notches in
them.   When out feeding they will immediately "freeze" in
the light of a torch.   If the leaves are touched, the
weevils instantly drop into the litter, where they lie
motionless in the dead, brown bases of the flax bushes and are
extremely difficult to see.  
    Females lay eggs at night in rows along the lower
edges of the leaves near the centre of the "fans" of flax
leaves.   Each female lays six to eight 2-millimetre-long
white eggs each night for several weeks during summer.   The
eggs gradually become almost black, and take 3-5 weeks to
hatch.  
    The newly emerged larvae are 3 millimetres long,
yellowish, and covered with long hairs.   They burrow into
the fleshy bases of the flax stems, where they feed on the
soft tissues.   When these larvae are fully grown, at about
20 millimetres long, they pupate among the rotting fibrous
material at the bases of the flax plants.   The pupal
cocoons are about 35 millimetres long and 20 millimetres wide
and are formed from a mixture of plant fibre and soft black
rotted matter.  
    In captivity, adult flax weevils will live for over 12
months, but how long a weevil spends as a larva or pupa is not
known.  
  photo  
        Stephens Island weevil     Anagotus
stephenensis    
      Turbott 's weevil     Anagotus
turbotti    
    New Zealand 's largest and most striking weevils belong
to the genus   Anagotus  , a group of both large and
small flightless weevils with differing habits and habitat
requirements.  
    Stephens Island and Turbott 's weevils, two of the
largest and most colourful, are the only lowland survivors of
a once diverse and widespread group.   Fragments of giant
weevil species similar in size and form to these have been
discovered in cave deposits at Waitomo, dating back some 1700
years, and others have been found in the Pureora Buried Forest
deposits formed during the Taupo eruption of about A.D. 130.
  None of the giant-sized   Anagotus   found in
prehuman subfossil cave and forest deposits have been found in
the more recent upper deposits.   They are likely to have
become extinct through being eaten by kiore, the Polynesian
rat, that arrived with humans some 800-900 years ago.  
    Turbott 's weevil is found only on the rat-free islands
of the Three Kings and Poor Knights, and on Muriwhenua of the
Hen and Chickens Islands&semi; the Stephens Island weevil has been
found only on Stephens Island.   These weevils, whose larvae
are wood borers, are found in the live wood of several
different trees, but they are especially fond of ngaio and
karaka.   The adults can be found day and night on the
branches of trees and have been observed eating the somewhat
oily leaves of ngaio.  
    Several other species of   Anagotus   are
generally distributed in New Zealand, and are not considered
to be endangered nor prone to rat predation.   These are
usually smaller species living in snow grasses and niggerhead
sedges, or in   Coprosma   or   Phyllocladus  ,
with one, quite abundant, in fallen logs.  
  photo  
      Speargrass weevil     Lyperobius
huttoni    
    The speargrass weevils are the most widely distributed
of the large flightless weevils and unlike most other species
they are chiefly found on the mainland, rather than on
rat-free offshore islands.   However, apart from a small
population on the Wellington coastline they are restricted to
the South Island in "islands of the upper atmosphere" -
remnant tussock grassland about 1200-1600 metres high on
mountain ranges carved out by early glaciations.  
    The speargrass weevil was so named because climbers
usually found it feeding on the stiff and spiked spear-shaped
leaves of   Aciphylla   (speargrass or spaniard).   It
is also found on the smaller, softer species of
  Aciphylla  , and on related   Anisotome  
plants, including the prostrate cushion form of   Anisotome
imbricata  .   Adult weevils are active during the day.
  Those feeding on the larger spiked speargrasses are better
protected from predators than those on soft-leafed
species.  
    Until 1950 only 12 specimens of speargrass weevils had
been found, in 4 localities.   Their rarity was considered
to result from the early practice of
  photo   
  caption  
burning tussock in the high-country sheep stations, or the
destruction of host plants by grazing animals.  
    Although there are suitable plants growing in most of
the natural tussock grasslands of the North Island, speargrass
weevils in the North Island are restricted to modified habitat
on the Wellington coastline.  
    The astelia weevil and the tussock weevil, large
flightless weevils found with speargrass weevils in both
grazed and ungrazed tussock lands, were almost exterminated
during the rat plagues that occurred in the mountains of the
South Island last century.   Rat outbreaks have not been
reported from the high country for the past 50 years, and
animals such as the large flightless weevils with limited
means of dispersal are slowly increasing.  
  photo  
  caption  
      Knobbled weevil     Hadramphus
stilbocarpae    
    Of all the large and flightless weevils in New
Zealand, the three species of   Hadramphus   are the
most ill-adapted to survival in landscapes modified by humans.
  Once found on Banks Peninsula and much of central
Canterbury,   Hadramphus tuberculatus   has not been
seen for more than 75 years and was probably eliminated by
rats.   A second species, called the coxella weevil, was
formerly present on Pitt Island, but is now found only on the
rat-free outlying islands in the Chathams group.   Here the
weevil 's food-plant of   Aciphylla dieffenbachii   is
confined to steep and inaccessible cliffs.  
    The knobbled weevil has had a chequered history and
was one of several native species to have been exterminated on
Big South Cape Island during the well-documented rat invasion
of 1962-63.   Ironically, the weevil was not officially
named until 1971, after its extinction, from specimens
collected some 15 years before.   Distinct populations of
the knobbled weevil are known from Bird Island in Foveaux
Strait and the Snares Islands, where
  caption  
  photo   
they live only on plants of   Stilbocarpa lyallii   or
  S. robusta  .   More recently,   Hadramphus  
weevils have been found to be common on the rat-free islets of
Breaksea Sound and Five Fingers Peninsula of Resolution Island
in Fiordland.   Here they are found on a different plant,
  Anisotome lyallii  .   The larvae feed upon the live
roots, and the adults chew large holes in the bases of the
leaf stems and feed on the sticky, resinous sap.   The
adults are active by night and congregate in large numbers on
a single plant.   They hide during the day in debris and
dead leaves on the ground at the base of the host plant,
whereas other suitable plants nearby will remain untouched.
  Why they should congregate in large numbers on a
particular plant until they have killed it is not known.
  This behaviour makes the knobbled weevil very prone to
attack by rats, and its presence or absence a good indicator
of whether there are rats on an island.  
  photo      
  

      ROSE FAMILY    
      Rosaceae  
  (rose-ay-see)  
      T  his worldwide but
mostly northern temperate family typically has flat
saucer-like flowers with five delicate petals and numerous
stamens.   Roses themselves are often bred so the flowers
are double - with so many petals the structure of the rose
flower is not obvious.   Apple trees and blackberries show
the flowers better.   Rosaceae include trees, shrubs, and
woody climbers, many of which have thorns or prickles.
  Both herbaceous and woody members often have leaves
composed of several leaflets.  
    Insect-pollination is the rule, but some genera have
wind-pollinated flowers lacking petals and nectar.   Carpels
are usually separate, each with its own style and stigma, an
unspecialised feature.  
    While the flowers help in unifying the family, the
fruits are diverse and used to define four subfamilies within
Rosaceae.   In the largest subfamily, the carpels are not
fused and each contains one seed.   Fruiting carpels are
often dry and may have hooks to aid dispersal.   Sometimes
each carpel has a fleshy coat and with others from the same
flower forms a cluster dispersed together as in blackberries
and raspberries.   In strawberries, an extension of the
flower stalk becomes fleshy around the dry carpels, while in
roses the stalk forms a fleshy cup, the rosehip, to enclose
the carpels.  
    In the second subfamily, each flower has only one
carpel.   The single seed sits inside a hard stone, usually
surrounded by a fleshy layer and outer skin.   The fruits of
  Prunus   are good examples, for this genus includes
plums, cherries, apricots, peaches, nectarines, as well as the
dry-coated almonds.  
    Fused carpels characterise the third subfamily.   A
fleshy outer layer formed from the flower stalk encloses the
papery carpel walls and several seeds.   Such fruits are
called pomes and include apples, pears and quinces as well as
the ornamental firethorns, rowans and cotoneasters.   The
fourth subfamily includes the garden spiraeas.   These have
capsules that open to release their seeds.  
    Native genera all belong to the first subfamily, and
in three of the four genera the typical rose-like flowers are
obvious.   The exception is our largest genus
  Acaena  , bidibids, where the flowers lack petals and
are wind-pollinated.   Bidibids (from the Maori piripiri)
are perennial herbaceous plants that form mats from creeping
rooting stems.   Leaves are made up of several leaflets
along two sides of a central stalk, and vary from pale green
to blue-grey or brown.   Flowers in
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
tight rounded heads have long filaments to hold the anthers
out from the heads, and feathery stigmas to pick up pollen.
  The fruit, of one or two carpels enclosed in a dry tube,
usually has long barbed spines to aid dispersal.   These
cling to passing animals and clothing.   Attractive spiny
fruits and coloured leaves make some bidibids popular
groundcover plants for gardens.  
    The five natives in the blackberry genus,
  Rubus  , have white flowers and yellow, orange, red or
black fruits.   Backward-pointing prickles on the undersides
of leaves and stems help the plants to climb but also snare
unwary passers-by, hence the name bush lawyer.   The
trailing   R. parvus   has the largest flowers and
fruits but grows only in the western South Island.   The
other four natives have small male and female flowers
clustered in large inflorescences on separate plants, and are
common vines of open habitats and forest gaps in both main
islands.  
    Our seven species of   Geum   and the single
native   Potentilla   all have pinnate leaves and dry
fruits.   A large terminal leaflet distinguishes
  Geum  , and all except one rare native have white
flowers.   The native potentilla is a creeping herbaceous
plant with small, yellow, saucer-shaped flowers typical of the
family.  
  photos  
  captions  
      COFFEE FAMILY    
      Rubiaceae  
  (ruby-ay-see)  
      M  any plants have
stipules, a pair of small flaps at the base of the leaf stalk
next to the stem, that protect young leaves and buds.
  These are always present in Rubiaceae and provide one of
the best clues to recognising this, the fourth largest
flowering plant family.   Leaves are always in pairs, one
leaf on each side of the stem, and so result in opposite pairs
of branches from buds in their axils.   The stipules on each
side of the leaf base are usually joined to those of the
opposite leaf, forming two common stipules that sit on the
stem between the leaf stalks.  
    Rubiaceae are mostly tropical and subtropical trees,
shrubs and climbers.   Those reaching temperate countries
are mainly herbaceous plants.  
    Flowers are usually insect-pollinated, with short
petal lobes and a long tube surrounding the stamens and often
the stigma as well.   Cultivated Rubiaceae include those
with colourful and complex flowers.   But in countries, such
as New Zealand, with few specialised insect pollinators,
native genera have simple flowers.  
    The varied dry or fleshy fruits help to identify
genera rather than the family.   The fleshy fruits of
  Coffea arabica   contain two "beans" each with a hard
outer layer.   This native of Ethiopia provides most of the
world 's coffee.  
      Coprosma   is our largest native genus and
gives the best fruiting displays of any native genus.
  Fruits, like those of coffee, usually contain two stones
each with a single seed.   Red fruits are commonest, but
others are orange, blue, white, pale yellow, violet, black or
even speckled.   The wind-pollinated flowers with reduced
petals are not typical of the family.   Male flowers with
four long dangling anthers and females with two long furry
stigmas are on different plants.   The fused stipules
identify the family and variations help to distinguish each of
the 50 or so species.  
    Plant habit, from mats to shrubs or small trees, and
the attractive foliage, make many coprosmas popular garden
plants.   Taupata,   C. repens  , with its glossy
green leaves, is one of the commonest and will form a good
hedge especially tolerant of salty coastal winds.   In the
wild, coprosmas grow everywhere, but are particularly plants
of scrubby and open vegetation, and forest understories.  
    Coprosmas show the paired branches of the family well.
  Many small-leaved shrubby species lack the dominant shoots
of most plants, and the numerous branches grow at wide angles
to interlace and form distinctive divaricating shrubs.
  This characteristic New 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
Zealand growth form is commonest in   Coprosma  .   It
allows the plant to position its leaves ready for
photosynthesis, even in winter, while protecting them from
frost and wind abrasion with an outer twiggy layer.  
    Crushed leaves and stems of a few coprosmas have a
revolting smell and the name   Coprosma   means
dung-smell.   The Maori used the sap and bark to treat cuts
and sores, not surprising as the powerful drug quinine also
belongs to this family.   Some Rubiaceae are important dye
plants, and coprosma bark provided the colour for khaki
uniforms of World War I soldiers.  
    Our other two native genera are herbaceous and have
inconspicuous flowers.   The nine naturalised and three
native bedstraws,   Galium  , have slender four-angled
stems often climbing through or over other vegetation.
  Their leaf-like stipules create a whorl of "leaves" at
each node.   Dry fruits with two one-seeded parts are
sometimes furnished with hooks, as in the weedy cleavers, to
aid dispersal.   The soft stems of   Nertera   root at
the nodes where there are small stipules between the pairs of
leaves.   Their usually fleshy red or orange fruits form
small splashes of colour in damp or shady places.  
  photos  
  captions  
      FOXGLOVE FAMILY    
      Scrophulariaceae  
  (scroff-you-larry-ay-see)  
      T  his worldwide, but
mainly temperate, family is well-represented in New Zealand,
being the fourth largest in our native flora.   Most members
are herbaceous or shrubby plants, but some are trees,
climbers, aquatics or semi-parasites.  
    Few other plant families can equal the diversity of
flowers found among the scrophs (as members of the family are
often called).   Typically, flowers are irregular and face
sideways.   Two of the petals often form an upper lip and
three a lower one, with all five joined into a tube near the
base.   But there are many more complex flowers adapted for
cross-pollination by insects and birds, ranging from long
tubes as in foxglove to small flowers with spreading petals as
in speedwells.   Petal number is reduced from five to four
in many genera and stamen number from five to four or two.
  In many scrophs the stigma protrudes beyond the anthers so
it is touched before the pollen.   In some, including our
native   Glossostigma  , the stigma is sensitive to
touch, closing for a while after contact with an insect.  
    Capsules with numerous small seeds are typical of the
family, but a few genera have fleshy fruits, or dry fruits
that do not open.  
    Ornamental garden scrophs include snapdragons, slipper
flowers, speedwells, penstemons, musks, nemesias, foxgloves
and our native hebes.   One of the few other commercial uses
of scrophs is the production of the heart drug digitalin from
foxgloves (  Digitalis   species).  
      Hebe  , with about 100 species, is the largest
genus in our native flora.   With   Parahebe   and
  Chionohebe  , it forms a group related to the
speedwell genus   Veronica   which also has two stamens
to each flower.   Only three hebes are native outside New
Zealand.   Two of our species occur in South America,
whereas the small French Polynesian island of Rapa has its own
hebe.   All hebes are woody.   Most are shrubs, some
merely creeping, but others reach the size of a small tree.
  Their leaves, in opposite pairs arranged in four ranks,
give a characteristic regular appearance to the shoots.
  Subalpine whipcord hebes look like conifers because of
their small scale-like leaves.   At the other extreme are
the large willow-like leaves of the lowland koromikos, eaten
as a cure for diarrhoea.  
    Compared with most scrophs, hebe flowers are simple.
  Most have four petals forming a funnel-like flower.   In
many of the shrubby species, flowers form brush-like
inflorescences bristling with stamens and styles.   Most
hebe flowers are white.   Some with fewer 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
flowers and spreading petals have brightly coloured anthers
and in others the petals are lilac.   One of the most
attractive is the New Zealand lilac which has diffuse
inflorescences of showy flowers.   Napuka,   Hebe
speciosa  , has deep magenta brush-like inflorescences and,
although rare in the wild, is a parent of many of the garden
hebes commonly grown in New Zealand and overseas.  
    Native parahebes usually have flowers even more like
those of speedwells.   Pollinators dislodge the anthers from
petal folds while seeking nectar from the base of the
flower.  
    The eyebrights,   Euphrasia  , with 25 species,
and the alpine   Ourisia   with 12, are the two other
large native genera of scrophs.   Both have four stamens in
pairs of different lengths, and sideways facing flowers with a
two-petalled upper and three-petalled lower lip.
  Eyebrights are semi-parasites invading the roots of other
plants but their green leaves make some of their own food.  
    Other natives include a purple musk
(  Mimulus  ) of coastal wetlands, and two species of
  Jovellana  , related to the South American slipper
flowers,   Calceolaria  , and with their petals
completely joined into a pouch-like tube.  
  photos  
  captions  
      POTATO FAMILY    
      Solanaceae  
  (sol-an-ay-see)  
      F  ew families provide as
many useful products as does the potato family, but it also
includes many weeds and poisonous plants.   Although found
worldwide, this is a largely Southern Hemisphere family with
its greatest diversity in tropical Central and South
America.  
    Most Solanaceae grow in disturbed habitats or arid
areas.   Many are herbaceous, while others are shrubs or
climbers.   A few are small trees.   Many have prickles or
produce nasty scents from bruised leaves or shoots.  
    The potato family is related to the foxglove family,
but the flowers are mostly regular.   Other distinctive
features are microscopic.   The fused petals are either
turned backwards or form a dish-like, tubular or bell-shaped
flower to attract insects, or in some cases birds as
pollinators.   Rather than spreading, the anthers often
touch one another and form a cone around the pistil.   They
release pollen either through holes at the top, or in the more
usual way through slits down the sides.  
    Fleshy berries containing numerous flat seeds are
often thought of as the characteristic fruit of this family.
  But some groups, for example tobaccos and petunias, have
capsules full of dust-like seeds.  
      It is strange to think that European cooking
lacked potatoes, tomatoes, paprika, chillies, cayenne pepper,
green, red and sweet peppers, cape gooseberry, tamarillo and
pepino before these members of the potato family were
introduced following the "discovery" of the Americas in late
15th century.   Many of these were staple foods for the
indigenous peoples of South America for centuries before this.
  Likewise, aubergines were eaten in Africa long before they
were used in Europe.  
    Potatoes arrived in Europe about 1573, and soon became
a staple food in Ireland.   In 1845 a fungus disease wiped
out the Irish potato crop resulting in starvation and mass
migration.  
    Tomatoes were initially thought to be poisonous or
were fed to stock.   By the late 18th century they were a
luxury food in Britain known as love apples.  
    Powerful chemicals called alkaloids occur in the
fruits and other tissues of many Solanaceae.   In small
quantities these may be useful drugs, as is atropine from
deadly nightshade, but when eaten indiscriminately they can
cause hallucinations or death.   All members of the family
should be treated with suspicion but the best-known poisonous
ones in New Zealand are: bittersweet, Jerusalem cherry,
henbane, angel 's trumpets, daturas, cestrum, and the green
parts of potatoes.  
    Tobacco, so popular for smoking, chewing and 
  photo  
  caption  
  table: Family Statistics  
  table: Family Characters  
snuff, contains the toxic alkaloid nicotine, which is also a
powerful insecticide.   It is difficult now to imagine the
astonishment of Columbus when he first saw American indians
smoking.   Just over a century later, the King of England
tried in vain to stop the "loathsome" habit there.  
    Showy flowers and fruits make many Solanaceae
attractive garden plants.   Petunias, marmalade bush,
flowering tobaccos, potato vine and Chinese lantern plant are
examples.  
    The potato genus itself,   Solanum  , includes
1400 species, three of which are native and 19 naturalised
here.   Small-flowered nightshade is now most common on
off-shore islands, having been largely replaced by its
European relative, black nightshade, on the mainland.   Both
have white flowers.   Small-flowered nightshade is a common
plant in the Pacific and may be a Maori introduction.
  Black nightshade is a common garden weed often called
deadly nightshade in New Zealand.   True deadly nightshade,
with its bell-shaped purplish flowers, is rare here.  
    Our other two natives are called poroporo.   These
are closely related soft-wooded shrubs of lowland and coastal
forest margins and clearings.   One has blue-purple and the
other lavender to white flowers.   Our poroporos are
cultivated in Eastern Europe to produce alkaloids used in
contraceptive pills.  
  photos  
  captions      
  

          BLUE DUCK - Symbol of wild and untamed
rivers      photo  
  caption    
    FOR ANYONE who has tramped through the
mountains of New Zealand, the whistle of the blue duck is
one of the most characteristic sounds of the wilderness.
  The spectacle of a pair of blue ducks bobbing downstream
with their fluffy chicks, expertly negotiating rapids and
white water, is unique to unmodified mountain rivers.   Even
the most hardened back country traveller treasures the memory
of these tame and confiding birds.   Yet, despite its legal
protection, the future of the blue duck is by no means
secure.  
    Blue ducks are river specialists, a distinction
they share with few other species of duck world-wide, notably
the African black duck, Salvadori 's duck of Papua New Guinea
and the torrent ducks of South America.   None of these
species are closely related.   All have evolved separately
to live in the difficult fast-water habitat - a
text  -  book case of convergent evolution.   The blue
duck is an ancient New Zealand species.   It has very simple
courtship displays and is territorial - unusual features
for a duck.   Most revealing, however, are the distinctive
proteins that make up its feathers.   These are an important
indication of its genetic uniqueness and ancient
origins.    
        Species in decline      
    When Forster, a naturalist on Cook 's Endeavour, first
described the blue duck, it was present throughout the
mountains of the New Zealand mainland.   It appears to have
been common in all forested river catchments, particularly in
steep high altitude areas, and occasionally right to the coast
as observed in Fiordland.   Well known to the Maori, it was
an important source of food on inland expeditions.   They
named it   whio   after the distinctive whistling
call of the male bird.   For the early European explorers it
was a charming and friendly source of companionship and
amusement.   So tame in fact that it often ended up in the
billy for the evening meal.  
    Charlie Douglas, the famous surveyor of South
Westland, noted that   "...its prevailing
characteristic is stupidity to an amazing degree.
    This combined with what appears to be a fatal thirst
for admiration is its ruin, and make it an easy prey to dogs
and men, and nothing but the inaccessible places it frequents
saves it from being exterminated.  "     Blue ducks
were a staple food of back country explorers such as
Barrington who, on his epic exploration of the Red Hills in
West Otago, ate blue ducks to help survive the rigours of this
remote and unforgiving country.  
    Early oral records show that blue ducks were
widespread and abundant.   Sadly, that is not the case
today.   Most birds are now confined to unmodified mountain
rivers in the central North Island and western South Island.
  River diversion and hydro dams for irrigation or power
generation have turned clear rushing waters into slow
turbid streams, as in the headwaters of the Whanganui River.
  Forest removal and agricultural development have led to
siltation of clean rivers and the loss of necessary riparian
(streamside) vegetation.   Populations of introduced trout
compete with blue duck for in-stream invertebrate food
sources.   Introduced predators threaten accessible
populations of the blue duck, whose ground nesting habits make
it especially vulnerable.   Its only natural predators were
other birds such as the black-backed gull and maybe the native
falcon or now extinct birds of prey.  
    Concern has been mounting in recent years over the
apparent contraction of blue  photo  
  caption   
duck distribution.   Trampers and hunters noted its
disappearance from favoured back country haunts such as the
Tararua Ranges.   Sightings of birds, and systematic surveys
of rivers, in the Arthur 's Pass area show that blue ducks have
disappeared from several river tributaries over the last 20
years.   But detailed monitoring of small populations has so
far failed to provide a conclusive answer to one of the
mysteries of blue duck populations - where do all the young
birds disperse?  
    Most years there is a surplus of fledglings, but
very few manage to either  photo  
  caption  
squeeze in a new territory amongst existing pairs,
displace an adult bird, or fill the gap left by a dead bird.
  However, numerous sightings of blue ducks on alpine
tarns and of single male birds have suggested that young birds
are more mobile than previously expected.   This has been
confirmed recently by sightings of colour-banded birds in
rivers some distance from their home territory in both the
North and South Islands.  
    Blue duck show all the symptoms of a species in
decline.   Populations are scattered between the
headwater tributaries of major rivers.   Blue ducks are
present in some streams but absent from adjacent, and
apparently similar, streams.   The lower modified reaches of
rivers are usually unoccupied as though blue ducks are
reluctant to disperse over land or across unfavourable
habitat.   While the total population is estimated to be
about three  photo  
  caption   
to four thousand adults, this is split into
    discreet    discrete     sub-populations.
  The largest two in the North Island are the 40 pairs in
each of the Motu and Whanganui catchments.   Their small
size and lack of interaction makes these populations
increasingly vulnerable to habitat changes.  
    In 1980, Wildlife Service (now DoC) scientist Murray
Williams set out to solve the mysteries of the blue duck by
studying their ecology on the Manganui-a-te-Ao River, a
tributary of the Whanganui.   The stimulus, Murray recalls,
came from two people - Janet Kear of England 's Wildfowl Trust
and US waterfowl biologist Frank McKinney.   They had
carried out brief  photo  
  caption   
studies of blue duck and recognised the need for further, more
detailed, research.   As well as their encouragement there
was a conservation imperative.   The National Government 's
subsidised loans for small hydro schemes had focussed
attention on the Manganui-a-te-Ao.   The entire river, the
only remaining free-flowing tributary of the Whanganui rising
in Tongariro National Park, was under threat.  
    For over ten years, Murray colour-banded every
resident bird and all juvenile birds that fledged in a ten
kilometre stretch of the river, monitoring an increase from
four to nine pairs.   Initially limited to 20 field days
each year, the research project is now one of the longest
studies of any duck species in the world and certainly the
most important study of a riverine duck.   It has revealed
some interesting results.   Most significant is that
inbreeding appears to be a natural feature of the blue duck
population - a surprising discovery in light of the
widely-held view that a broad genetic base is essential for
the long term survival of a species.   Colour banding of
individuals by Murray, and genetic 'fingerprinting' by fellow
DoC scientist Sue Triggs, has confirmed that there are
successful brother-sister pairings and even a
grandmother-grandson pairing.   In this study no duckling
established a territory more than ten kilometres from its
natal area.  
    Blue ducks have much in common with other relict New
Zealand species.   They are relatively long-lived, have a
low reproductive rate and irregular breeding success,
similar to our more critically endangered species.
  Fortunately, the blue duck is still what Murray calls a
   'second tier'   species.   The blue duck joins
a long list of native birds which are still reasonably
widespread but are nowhere common.   Birds like the kea,
kaka, kiwi, falcon, robin and blue duck are still adjusting to
extensive loss of habitat, introduced predators and
competition from browsing mammals.   At least with these
species, early attention may ensure that last-ditch rescue
programmes, like those mounted for the black robin, black
stilt and kakapo, may not be necessary.  
        Suited to fast water      
    Blue ducks are admirably suited to the fast water
habitat.   Their strong webbed feet can propel them across
rushing white water - the young chicks literally run across
the top.   They are superb divers and adept at foraging
amongst the stones in riffles, and in the lee of large
boulders.   A curious-looking black flap on either side of
the bill protects it from abrasion against rocks.   So harsh
is their rough rocky home that plastic leg bands can wear
through completely in two years and the identification
numbers stamped into the thick aluminium bands soon become
illegible.  
    Blue ducks rely on insect larvae for food.   These
invertebrates live on and under the stones of the river,
occasionally drifting downstream, particularly in floods.
  Recent studies by Kevin Collier (DoC) and Clare Veltman
and Ian Henderson (Massey University) indicate that large prey
items, particularly caddis fly larvae, are preferred in North
Island rivers.   The frequent shiny dark fragments of insect
exoskeleton in their conspicuous droppings testify to their
rich invertebrate diet.   In the Southern Alps, where blue
ducks are present in the subalpine zone, fruit from riparian
shrubs forms an important part of their autumn diet.   I
have observed blue ducks amongst the streamside shrubs,
gorging themselves on Coprosma berries and leaving
thousands of undigested seeds splattered on the open
riverbed.  
    Year-round territoriality has probably evolved from
the need for a pair to maintain their breeding partnership
and to defend their nesting and feeding areas.
  Observations by blue duck researchers, including my own
over several years in the Arthur 's Pass area, indicate that
the main constraint on blue duck productivity is the
availability of females.   Female blue ducks have a lower
survival rate than males, because of the energy demands of
producing eggs and their vulnerability to predators
during nesting.   Males are more common.   They often
engage in spectacular fights, swiping at each other with the
prominent spurs on their wings, when competing for the limited
number of females.  
        Recovery plan      
    Work on blue duck is now coordinated by a national
liaison group with representatives from DoC, Forest and
Bird, Ducks Unlimited and universities, as well as independent
researchers.   The group 's working document, compiled after
the first national blue duck meeting in 1987, has directed
efforts over the last five years.   A revised version of
this Blue Duck Recovery Plan will guide blue duck work for the
next decade, identifying research and monitoring
priorities for blue duck conservation.   The annual meetings
of the group provide valuable forums for discussing the latest
research results and for encouraging  photo  
  caption   
regional conservation projects.   Colour-banding of
individual birds and monitoring of small populations is now
occurring in most blue duck areas.  
    Several studies of blue duck ecology are being carried
out by Massey University and DoC researchers, including an
important study of the effects of introduced trout on blue
duck productivity.   Birds have been transferred from the
central North Island to Mt Taranaki where they have
successfully established a new breeding population.   Also,
scientists are experimenting with radio transmitters in an
attempt to solve the great blue duck mystery - Where do all
the young birds go?   Preliminary results show that some
young males move right out of the catchment, returning again
after a few months.  
    An important part of this national conservation
effort is captive breeding.   'Operation Whio' aims to
breed blue ducks in captivity for eventual release into the
wild to supplement existing populations or establish new ones.
  Over 40 blue ducks, nearly all raised in captivity, are
now held in aviaries around the country.   The breeding
effort is coordinated by Ducks Unlimited, a national
waterfowl organisation.  
    The Mt Taranaki experiment has shown that it should be
possible to re-establish blue duck in areas where they have
become extinct.   However, further research to determine
the critical requirements of good blue duck habitat is
essential, as the reasons for the decline in blue duck
populations are still not clearly understood.   A survey
of blue duck habitat throughout the country by scientist Kevin
Collier has shown that favourable rivers tend to have narrow
channels, high gradients and stability, low summer water
temperatures, large boulders, and intact native forest as
riparian vegetation.  
    With an improved understanding of blue duck ecology,
and the guidance of a recovery plan, efforts to protect
the species can be better directed.   According to Murray
Williams, the key to survival of the species lies in the
protection of successful family lines.   Some pairs are very
productive, consistently raising at least two young per year
on average.   Other pairs rarely succeed in their
breeding attempts.   He found the recovery of the blue duck
population on the Manganui-a-te-Ao was primarily due to the
efforts of two pairs whose abundant offspring colonised the
vacant territories up and down the river.  
    In an effort to assist the Manganui-a-te-Ao blue duck
population, white water rafters have voluntarily agreed to
stop rafting down the river during the critical months of
October and November, when newly born chicks are vulnerable to
outside disturbance.  
    Unfortunately, the major threat to the survival of the
blue duck, and the historic cause of its decline, is still
with us.   Destruction or modification of blue duck
habitat continues today and has taken on a whole new meaning
with the creation of Electricorp - a State Owned Enterprise
which believes it has a mandate to increase electricity
consumption.   With the growing demand for energy, pressure
is mounting to increase hydro power generation from the
country 's untamed rivers.   The Government does not have an
energy conservation policy and New Zealanders are facing a
succession of battles throughout the country as wild
rivers are eyed by electricity producers to supply more power.
  Increasing hydro power generation is not necessary if
proper energy conservation and energy efficiency measures
are implemented.  
    The blue duck requires unmodified rivers.   Its
present distribution is testimony to this.   While the
intricate ecological requirements of the blue duck are still
only partially understood, there is no doubt about its
requirement for a pristine habitat.   The blue duck is a
symbol for the life-blood of the country - our wild and scenic
rivers.   Its presence indicates healthy and unmodified
river ecosystem, upon which many agricultural, industrial and
urban uses downstream are dependent.   If New Zealand
loses the distinctive '  whio  ...   whio  ...'
from its mountain streams then it has lost not only a national
symbol of the back country, but will have sacrificed the
quality and character of the country 's river
systems.    
  

    T  HE SLAUGHTER WAS dreadful, and went on for
years.   Each morning crushed corpses lay strewn over the
battle zone, and yet within days - often by the very next
night - plentiful reinforcements would pour out from their
concealed lairs only to be trampled beneath father 's solid
slippers.  
    My mother 's periodic complaints about the unsightly
and slippery desecration of paths and lawns did little to stem
the carnage.   But, like many of history 's more prolonged
battle campaigns, there was no clearcut winner.
  Indefatigable persistence won my father a measure of
control, but never victory.   As every gardener knows, it 's
hard to eliminate slugs and snails.   Those nocturnal
armies seem to spring from the ground, leaving a wake of
perforated plants, silver trails and green faeces.  
    Although   Helix aspersa  , the common
garden snail, and its many pestiferous slug cousins are
European immigrants, New Zealand is well endowed with its own
native snail fauna, plus a sprinkling of slugs.   These
natives spurn agricultural delicacies, far preferring the dank
underworld of the forest floor, and it is likely that most New
Zealanders have never seen a single one, although we may
have as many as 1000 species.  
    Most land slugs and snails constitute a distinct
group of air-breathing gastropod (one-shelled) molluscs named
pulmonates.   The best way to understand snails is to think
of them as an amalgamation of four components: a shell
(for protection), a head (for sensing the world outside), a
foot (for movement) and a body mass (to keep the rest
functioning).  
    One of the features that separate molluscs from all
other animals is the mantle, a membranous extension of the
body which is responsible for making the shell.   In
gastropods there is a space between this mantle and the main
body of the animal.   The space is large when the animal is
extended and crawling, and small when the animal has retracted
into the shell.  
    Pulmonates have enclosed this space - termed the
mantle cavity - to form an air-breathing lung.   A small
hole, the pneumostome, allows air in and out.  
    Each individual snail usually has both male and female
reproductive organs, so they are true hermaphrodites.
  The reproductive system is elaborate, and its details are
used to separate one species from another.   Snails also
possess sophisticated digestive, circulatory, nervous,
excretory and locomotory systems.   Surprisingly for
such complex animals, they seem able to regenerate all body
parts except the central nervous system.  
    While most people may not find snails a particularly
riveting subject, there is a smattering of enthusiasts in whom
snails inspire intense devotion.   Guru of this select
company is Dr Frank Climo,
  photo  
  caption  
Curator of Molluscs at Wellington 's National Museum.
  Frank readily concedes that for him snails are more than a
mere passion.     "  Snails are the key to my world
view.   In their spiral shapes I see a reflection of the
world 's symmetry, the movement of tectonic plates, and
much more."      
    Frank 's search for keys to understanding the
relationships and distribution of our snails has led him
to embrace the panbiogeographical ideas of Frenchman Leon
Croizat.  
    Panbiogeography emphasises the prominence of earth
movements such as continental drift and plate tectonics in
accounting for present-day distributions of organisms.
  When land masses collide, the organisms get mixed
together.   As one land mass slides under another, life
forms pile up at the boundary, much as goods accumulate at the
end of a conveyor belt.   By looking at present
distributions of organisms one can reconstruct
prehistoric geology.  
    Although this sounds fairly reasonable, in some of
Frank 's recent writing panbiogeography seems to burst out from
the prosaic manacles of snail taxonomy to recast the world.
  In the   New Zealand Journal of Zoology   Frank
writes:   "Panbiogeography will remove much fear ....
from the international community.     This reduction
in fear levels (a measure of the reducing power of the
collective unconscious) will improve international
relations, make rabid 'nationalism' irrelevant and thus
make humanity more healthy.  "    
    Despite Frank 's somewhat unorthodox ideas on
panbiogeography and snails as the key to the cosmos, he does
know a lot about these creatures.   His special interest
is the myriad species of small snails found throughout New
Zealand.   The largest of them would be the size of the
extinct one cent piece, but most are much smaller, and plenty
are no larger than a pinhead.   Shy and retiring, they
are the sort of thing that you rarely find unless you are
looking for them, and not too many people grub in the dark
heaps of decaying leaves and wood favoured by the snails.
  Even then, it takes a trained eye to spot them.  
    Often they are more abundant on the fringes of bush
than in the impenetrable depths.   Occasionally, they
crop up in unexpected places.   Grafton Gully in central
Auckland sported an attractive stand of bush last century, but
now there remains only a smattering of scrubby natives
leavening a mass of indifferent exotics.   The small area is
squeezed between encroaching buildings on one side and
concrete capillaries of the motorway system on the other.
  Wandering Jew climbs rampant over everything.   Yet,
wonder of wonders, there are a surprising number of small
native snails under this lush carpet.   Perhaps 10 or 15
native species are in residence, and at least one is
flourishing.  
    A far greater range of species can be found in
Auckland 's Waitakere Ranges.   Jim Goulstone, a
knowledgeable snail enthusiast and a professional
tomato grower, has compiled a checklist of 120 species found
in the Waitakeres.   An extra 30 species occur in other bush
areas in the greater Auckland area.   Many have a
surprisingly narrow distribution.   "You would
expect there to be north-south differences in snail
distribution in New Zealand,"   explains Jim,
  "and there are some, but there are also marked
east-west differences, even when the country is as narrow as
it is around Auckland.     Quite a few extra species can
be uncovered in the Hunuas that aren't present in the
Waitakeres.  "    
    I asked him how he went about collecting small
snails.  
      "  The most important thing I take is a good
heavy duty pair of leggings.
  photos  
  captions  
  In the bush I seem to spend a lot of time grovelling
around on hands and knees, and it 's always wet.   Usually I
head for a spot that isn't too damp, because dead shells don't
last long in the wet.   Somewhere a bit drier, ideally
beside a vertical wall, a place the snails might fall off, can
be good.  
      "  One of the very best spots is a really big
old rimu tree.   Snails live under the flaky bark on the
lower trunk, and this is constantly falling off and rotting at
the foot of the tree.   Once you 've got under the dry
surface leaves into the fine tilth, you 're where the snails
are.   Fine, black compost is what you want most of all.
  Another good spot is under the bark of a fallen tree.
  After the tree has rotted to the right stage the bark
lifts off in large plates.   Snails like the black humus
between bark and trunk.  
      "  Some sorts of fungus do a great job on fallen
wood.   They destroy everything except the cell walls,
and you can push your foot right through the log.   In there
you always find   Charopa  .   Rotting nikau fronds
are not a bad place to find snails either.   The bases are
tough and smooth, so they provide a good surface to see the
regularity of the snail shell on.   There are quite a lot of
things that resemble shells at first glance - seeds, rolled up
arthropods and especially coiled millipedes.   Some trees
such as kauri and tanekaha never have many snails associated
with them.   Roots overgrow their tough leaves before
they ever compost."      
    So, having found a likely spot and done a bit of
grovelling in the humus, what next?     "  Finding
some snails indicates
  caption  
  photos  
  caption  
more in hiding, so I collect a few litres of leaf
mould to sort through at home.   After drying it out in the
boiler house used for heating the glasshouses, I put it
through two sieves.   The coarse one was put together
from plastic mesh used to stop leaves blocking downpipes, and
the second one is a fine garden sieve.   Other people use
different methods.   David Roscoe [a snail enthusiast from
Nelson] somehow manages to float the small snails off in a
dish of water.   It 's amazing watching him pluck those tiny
little shells off the surface of the water with his
fingers."      
    Jim prefers to use an artist 's brush that has had most
of its bristles removed.   He waves a particularly
emaciated brush at me and explains that the snails get held
between the hairs, making it easy to transfer them from the
sieved leaf fractions to their final resting place: customised
matchboxes stored in shallow tray filing cabinets.
  Inspection of the matchboxes reveals that each (of the
thousands in Jim 's collection) is fitted with a polystyrene
insert in which a hole has been cut to contain the snails.
  A small sheet of thin glass covers each box.  
    The shells look perpetually secure, but apparently
not so.   Most small land snail shells are precariously
fragile - mainly protein with little calcium carbonate.
  Leaf litter tends to be acidic, and thin calcium shells
would be in danger of being
  photos  
  caption  
dissolved by acid.   A protein skin on the shell - termed a
periostracum - protects the shell from this hazard.
  caption    photo  
  There are other problems with storage, as Jim
explains:   "Frequently - especially if they are put
away damp - a white crystalline substance forms on the shell
and starts to eat into it.     They call it museum
disease, and once it gets a hold the shells don't last long.
  A lot of old shells in the core museum collections have
completely disintegrated.  "    
    Fortunately, these collections are constantly being
replenished by the efforts of amateur collectors who
  photo  
send the minute fruit of their searches down to Frank Climo.
  He adds interesting specimens to the museum 's
collections and uses the material as grist for his taxonomic
and biogeographical studies.  
    These collectors are a vital part of the scientific
process and are experts in their own right.   Most have
discovered new species of snails, and some have been
rewarded by having species named after them.  
    David Roscoe, inspired by the expanding database
being built up on snails, is pushing for the government to
provide funding for a national database on all animal and
plant species.       "It would contain detailed
distributional data as well as information on the
characteristics of species, and be widely available.   A
teacher waiting to lead a biology field trip could access the
database to ascertain detailed information on species in
the area of the proposed visit.   It would be of great use
to amateur and
  photo  
  caption  
professional alike, whether interested in taxonomy,
environmental monitoring or whatever."      
    David, along with Pauline Mayhill, an avid Tauranga
collector, has already started the scheme for snails.  
    Norman Gardner, a retired cabinet maker in Birkenhead,
Auckland, was perhaps the first of the scientific amateurs to
become really interested in snails, and he has been pursuing
them for close to 50 years.
  caption  
  photo  
  Although still very active in snail work, he has
followed a somewhat different trajectory.   In
recent years he has left New Zealand snails to others and
concentrated on the many neglected Pacific Island species.  
    Colourful tree snails are common in the islands,
whereas New Zealand has no true tree snails.   There are
also fewer small species than in New Zealand, but more larger
ones, though there is nothing to compare with the
magnificence of our   Powelliphanta  .  
    The minute New Zealand species are also more notable
for architectural exuberance.   Sculptural detail of
such delicacy that it requires a scanning electron
microscope to unlock its intricacies is common.   Some
species are tall spired, others flat, and every
conceivable intermediate form exists.   Some resemble
beehives while others compensate for more pedestrian form
with elaborate surface plates, giving them the appearance of
mini-turbines.   Hairs and bristles cover the surface of
many species, and yet others sport complex arrays of plates in
their apertures.  
    The functional significance of much of this
sculpture is obscure, but one guess is that the sculpture
stops dirt clinging to the shell.   To a two-millimetre
snail, even a speck of dirt could represent a sizeable
burden.   photo  
  caption  
  Longer shells (10mm-plus) are much less
elaborate.   Apertural plates perhaps serve to reduce water
loss from the resting animal.   To a slimy, soft-bodied
mollusc, living in air is hazardous.   Drying out is a
constant danger, hence the damp habitats and nocturnal
behaviour.  
    Yet droughts do occur, and snails have to cope.
  Many species are able to go into a state of quiescence -
termed aestivation.   Some secrete a tough mucus membrane
(an epiphragm) to close out the world, and pulmonates can lose
an astonishing amount of their body weight (50-80 per
cent) by dehydration without suffering irreversible damage.
  In cold areas snails may also hibernate in
  cartoon  
winter.  
    If you are a slug or snail, just getting around
uses up a lot of water - it 's almost a fuel.   Mucus, that
silver trail snails leave, is essential in locomotion, and
water is its main constituent.   Prevent the snail
secreting mucus and it can't move.   Although all snail
mucus seems glutinous and clinging, it apparently has
different properties depending on whether it 's on the back of
the animal, in the gut or lubricating the sole of the
foot.  
    Mucus also has a role in mating, with some introduced
slugs copulating while suspended from long mucus
ropes.   Thus separated from the confines of terra firma,
they unfurl their copulatory organs - in one Swiss species to
a remarkable 80cm - and exchange packets of sperm.   After
disentangling their entwined parts, one slug falls to the
ground, leaving the other to climb back up its slimy tresses.
  Partners often store the sperm "for a rainy day" -
literally.   They fertilise their eggs only on wetter
days more suited to egg laying.  
    The mating habits of our 20 or 30 native slugs are
unknown.   These species occur mostly in the South Island,
and all belong to one distinctive group.   They bear a
close resemblance to a slender four-centimetre-long dead
leaf of yellowish hue with darker veins.   The slime they
exude has a distinct yellow tinge.   A few species have the
eyes on short stalks, but there are no other tentacles.
  Some favour damp leaves or rotting wood while others
prefer the closeness of flax and nikau palm leaf bases.  
    Slugs are really just land snails without shells, but
many still possess internal shell rudiments.   A few snail
species seem to be halfway between slugs and snails, with
shells still clearly visible but reduced to fig-leaf
proportions.   Members of the genus   Schizoglossa  
are one such group.   The shell looks like that of a 15mm
paua, but provides meagre protection for the 50mm animal.  
      Schizoglossa   is allied to our most
spectacular native snails - indeed, some of the most striking
land snails to be found anywhere.   These are members of the
family Paraphantidae, particularly the genus
  Powelliphanta  .   It is named after Dr A.W.B.
Powell, a former conchologist at Auckland Museum who studied
  photos  
  captions  
the snails during the 1930s and   '40s  .   Unlike the
smaller natives talked about earlier, these snails are large
(diameter 40-110mm) and strikingly beautiful.   Some of the
largest are plain old-gold coloured, but most resemble
polished wood with patterns of axial or spiral stripes in
blacks, browns and gold.  
    Headquarters of the group are the forests of
north-west Nelson, but others extend down to Fiordland,
Southland and across the Marlborough Sounds, with a few in the
North Island - around Levin and a smattering through the
southern axial ranges as far north as Egmont and Waikaremoana.
  Some species live at low altitudes, but a number prefer
the subalpine environment at 700-1200m.  
      Unlike the small snails, which feed on the
microscopic fungi and algal films on detritus,
  Powelliphanta   are carnivores.   For the most part
they live deeply buried in leaf mould and feed on large
(20cm-plus) native worms, sucking them in like spaghetti.
  Because the worms are large, the snails need eat only
occasionally.  
      Powelliphanta   are not exactly outgoing.
  At times photographer Michael Schneider and I crouched for
four or five hours vainly waiting for snails to emerge from
their shells.   And if they were coy about public
appearances, eating in front of humans must have been the
ultimate breach of snail etiquette.   Pushing enormous worms
into their faces elicited not the slightest interest (though
later Michael was successful with garden worms.)  
    Anne Strachan, who kept   Powelliphanta   for
several years, noted peculiarities in the   snails'  
eating behaviour.     "It seemed to me that the
snails put out a substance that affected the worms when they
wanted to feed,"   she told me.     "Usually
the worms crawl over the snail 's mucus trails no trouble at
all, but when the snail is hungry, the worm blanches and goes
limp as soon as it touches snail mucus."    
    Unfortunately, the snails themselves seem to be a
desirable item on quite a few other menus.  
    Kath Walker, who has had a long interest in these
snails and now works for the Department of Conservation in
Nelson, showed us a selection of mutilated shells.
  "  Rats are a real menace, especially in lowland
situations.   They start chewing the lip of the shell and
slowly work around the main whorls, devouring the animal
as they go.   Wekas tend to destroy the spire of the shells
with their beaks in their efforts to extract the animal.
  Pigs simply crush the whole shell.   Other birds,
probably keas and kakas, peck into the body whorl beside the
aperture, although sometimes the shell is sufficiently tough
that they don't succeed in getting in."    
    Predation by vertebrates is the main cause of
mortality in   Powelliphanta  .   Considering all
species, probably two thirds of dead shells bear damage
attributable to one of these predators.  
    Kath has set up snail houses in the grounds of several
homes she has occupied and after a lot of tedious work in
providing the moisture, humidity, calcium and food they need,
has succeeded in growing and breeding   Powelliphanta  ,
making many unique and fascinating observations along the way.
  For instance, she recalls seeing two snails trying to
eat the same worm.   "  One evening a medium-sized
snail had almost completely ingested a big worm when a larger
snail latched onto the other end.   Next morning, both
snails were still mouth to mouth, tugging at the worm, but the
bigger snail finally got it all."    
    Her measurements and weighings of captive snails and
her field work in monitoring two South Island
  Powelliphanta   populations have put Kath in a unique
position to know how rapidly the snails grow.
    "Generally the shell 's lip extends by 5-8mm
per year, so large snails could be 10-20 years or
older."    
    Such ages place   Powelliphanta   amongst the
Methuselahs of the snail universe, where lifespans of 1-5
years are common.  
    Like many longer-lived animals,
  Powelliphanta   lays a small number of large eggs.
  Although hermaphrodites,   Powelliphanta  
usually mate and fertilise each other.   Mating involves
one snail sitting on top of another and the two exchanging
sperm packets.   It is accompanied by a lot of
  drawing and photo  
  captions  
bubbles.  
    It seems that fertilisation does not always require
two individuals.   Kath Walker kept a solitary
  Powelliphanta   in monastic confinement for 18 months,
and this individual eventually produced fertile eggs,
suggesting that snails may self-fertilise if necessary.
  (Some doubt remains, because snails can store viable sperm
from another snail for long periods.)  
    According to Kath,   Powelliphanta   lay one or
two eggs per week during the spring, and they are huge
compared to the size of the snail.   Shaped like
  birds'   eggs, the largest are 12-14mm long - not much
smaller than a sparrow 's egg!   Eggs are laid in the ground
(from an aperture near the mouth, not the rear end) and
require 2-9 months to hatch out a young snail.  
    I can't help wondering if some of these youngsters
ever see daylight.   They are nocturnal, and with one
species the only live specimens we unearthed were buried
beneath 300mm of decayed beech litter and sinewy roots - deep
and inaccessible enough to escape all predators... except
man.      

  

        GARBAGE    
      Living in a throwaway world    
By Andrea Lomdahl  photo  
  caption  
      R  ECENTLY I MADE ONE of my regular
pilgrimages to the local landfill to dispose of the
household waste products which I had not been able to recycle
or fit into the plastic rubbish bags the local council
provides.   Recycling facilities at the landfill are
rather limited, consisting simply of three bins in which to
put green, brown and clear glass containers.   One would
think that people would find this system fairly simple to
follow, but I discovered when I went to recycle my bottles
that the different colours of glass had been well mixed up in
the bins, and all sorts of other unsavoury rotting rubbish had
been thrown in as well.  
    I have observed on many other occasions that the
valiant recycling efforts that manage to get off the ground in
our society are often thwarted by ignorant behaviour of this
sort.   This set me thinking about the problems of dealing
with the huge amounts of the waste we generate, and how one
might encourage some sensible reduction in this waste
quantity.   It is clear firstly that we should all take
a hard look at ourselves and our own wasteful habits.    
      Golden Rules    
    The four principles of dealing with rubbish should be:
use less, re-use, recycle and dispose of safely - in that
order.  
    We are all part of a disturbingly wasteful consumer
society that seems determined to use the Earth 's resources as
fast as possible.   We readily bow down to the demands of
fashion, changing our clothes, car, household fittings and
anything else we think might not measure up to the standards
set by our neighbours.   That is of course if we have the
money to do so.   Otherwise we simply wish we had the money
to be wasteful like everyone else.  
    I attended the inaugural conference of the Institute
of Waste Management recently, and one of the speakers,
Alastair Gunn of Waikato University, said in response to a
question, that in his view the meaning of life to most
children was "shopping".   No doubt the remark was somewhat
tongue-in-cheek, but there is also a considerable amount of
truth in it.   On the one hand we berate the Government and
local authorities for not doing enough about "The Waste
Problem", and on the other hand we bring up our children in
the same image of ourselves, that is as materialistic
consumers.  
    We all think environmental problems should be solved,
but preferably by others, and that gets me back to recycling.
  It takes a little bit of effort to separate out the brown,
green and clear bottles, and obviously some people are not
able to make this effort.   There are also those who would
deliberately thwart such initiatives by throwing in any old
rubbish, and very little can be done about these
people.  
      Everyone 's Responsibility.    
    It takes an effort to make recycling successful,
and this effort must in part at least be at an individual
level.   Each one of us must take responsibility in some
small way for the global environmental crisis, for it is
simply the outcome of the collective selfishness and greed of
many millions of people.  
    This is not to say, however, that all levels of
government should not be making much more effort to promote
waste reduction and reuse and ensure wastes are managed
properly.   Politicians are certainly raising
environmental issues regularly at present as these issues are
popular ones.   It is to be hoped that very soon the actions
on resource conservation start following the words.  
    One example is the report on "Packaging and the New
Zealand Environment" produced recently by the Ministry for
the Environment.   It was generally a well-written report
which outlined some useful initiatives, but it backs away from
the real interventions needed to have a strong impact on the
way we manage waste.   It sets a target for a 20 percent
reduction in solid waste volumes by  photo  
  caption  
1993, but it does not give any convincing ways for achieving
this target.  
    There are very good reasons for actively encouraging
waste reduction and recycling.   We thereby conserve
resources, promote a conservation approach, reduce pollution
associated with disposal of waste, and, most importantly to
some, we can save money by reducing the quantities of refuse
that need to be disposed of in expensive landfills.  
    There are also plenty of opportunities for recycling,
for example glass, plastics, paper, aluminium cans, other
metals, oil, solvents, textiles.   In some cases such as oil
and scrap steel, government changes to cost structures have
indirectly worked against recycling.  
    Last year 10 million litres of lead-contaminated
oil was dumped or burned in New Zealand because it was
supposedly more economic to buy new oil from the Middle East
rather than collect it from around the country for
recycling.  
    Deregulation of the scrap industry has been good and
bad news for recycling.   Good quality scrap steel is
vigorously pursued and often exported, whereas unprofitable
low grade steel is often neglected, although to the credit of
both landfill operators and the scrap metal industry, some
efforts are being made to recycle unprofitable or
marginally profitable scrap steel.  
    Before 1983, all car batteries were New Zealand-made
and recycled to recover and re-use lead.   The industry was
protected by special licences and by duties on imported
batteries which cannot be recycled.   The licences and
duties have now been lifted and imported batteries have
flooded into the country.   In 1983, 4644 batteries were
imported but this rose to 72,543 in 1988.   Today few
batteries are recycled - many are probably sitting in
sheds, backyards or at the tip leaking lead and other toxic
chemicals into the environment.  
      Recycling Wrongs    
    If the opportunities are there, and the reasons are
there, what is going wrong?   There are a number of
successful recycling ventures, but many others have been
attempted and subsequently abandoned because there was no
money in it.   There are a number of reasons for this,
including the fact that prices do not reflect the true value
of raw resources, and that true costs of landfilling are often
not reflected in setting landfill charges.   There are
also technical difficulties in reusing many wastes, and often
a lack of information and awareness about waste reduction and
recycling.   There are also the difficult problems of
individual selfishness and laziness I have already
mentioned.  
    A United States pilot study has shown that much more
waste can be recycled than is done currently.   New
Zealand 's waste recycling record is nothing to be proud of
in comparison to Japan, for example, which recycles 50
percent of its waste.  
    Barry Commoner of New York 's City University
carried out a study to get the most out of people 's garbage.
  He showed that you can recycle 84 percent of people 's
rubbish.   The people involved in the study kept three
different containers in their homes - one for food scraps,
another for recyclable paper, cans and bottles, and a third
container for non-recyclables - and the containers were
picked up by trucks with separate compartments.   The food
scraps were taken to a composting plant, and the other
products recycled.  
      Rubbish Mountain    
    In the United States, and other countries running
out of landfill space, such an approach might have to be
compulsory in the years to come.   In 15
    year 's      years'       time when a New
York landfill site is full, it will be the highest point on
the eastern seaboard between Maine and Florida!  
    Even if we became a far less wasteful society there
will inevitably still be wastes that will need to be
landfilled.   There are very good public health reasons for
removing refuse away from people in a clean efficient
manner and landfills should be recognised as very useful
amenities.  
    Landfilling of refuse which cannot be reused can
be regarded as a type of recycling in itself.   Proper
selection and management of landfill sites and proper planning
for the use of completed sites can result in conversion of
poor quality land (not wetlands or important shrublands!) into
useful land and facilities.   Former landfill sites can be
used as parks and industrial land, and lead the way into the
development of residential land.  
    It has been interesting to note that as the standard
of landfill management has improved so that these
facilities have been changed from dumps to landfills, the
opposition to their construction has increased rather than
decreased.   This is not surprising if one considers the
past record of the old dumps.  
    Landfills require close control of leachate, litter,
and fires.   They must be carefully operated with good
cover and tight control of the tipface, and they should be
well-screened from view.   Access roads to the landfill
should be kept clean.   There is now a new imperative on
landfills for control of landfill gas.   This gas can be
dangerous and cause explosions, and methane, its main
constituent, is a very serious contributor to the greenhouse
effect.   The gas can also smell and be toxic.  
    Most people accept the need for landfills,
particularly if everything has been done to reduce and
reuse the wastes prior to landfilling, but no one seems to
want these facilities anywhere near them.   The only way
around such attitudes is for the operators of these facilities
to improve their records and demonstrate to the public that
the landfills can be run without causing nuisances and
environmental degradation.  
      Hazardous Wastes    
    Another matter which needs urgent attention is the
disposal of hazardous waste.   Over the last few decades the
chemical industry has thrived, producing a whole range of
products which have become eagerly accepted by our consumer
society.   Many of these products are very useful and
contribute much to our present standard of living.
  Many others may be of doubtful use.   The production of
hazardous waste is a problem that has crept up almost
unsuspectingly on this thriving industry.   Disposal of
these wastes and the clean-up of contaminated sites are now
presenting enormous and costly difficulties and much
environmental degradation has occurred.   In New Zealand the
amounts of hazardous waste being generated are not large, but
they present some difficult disposal problems and these wastes
are not generally being properly managed.   The main types
of industry which produce hazardous waste in New Zealand are
the timber treatment, metal finishing, chemical processing,
tanning, and petroleum/oil industries.   These and other
industries produce a wide range of wastes, including heavy
metals (for example arsenic, chromium, cadmium), acids and
bases, cyanides, pesticide wastes, phenols and other
organic substances such as PCBs.  
    In Auckland the degradation of the Manukau Harbour
with contaminants such as the pesticide chlordane, and
contamination of sites in Penrose and Onehunga and
elsewhere has focused attention on the problems of
hazardous waste disposal.   There are around 2500 industries
in the Manukau catchment.   160 of these have been required
to upgrade their work practices or facilities to prevent
pollution.  
    Controls to deal with hazardous waste could take the
form of licensing disposal sites, a manifest system for
transport of hazardous wastes to ensure such wastes do not
get "lost" en route, strong penalties for unsatisfactory
disposal, and an effective programme for notifying and
cleaning up contaminated sites.   Clear guidelines and a
good advisory service are also needed.   The Government has
decided to set up a Hazards Control Commission to manage
hazardous chemicals and other hazardous substances such as
genetically modified organisms.  
  diagrams  
  photos  
  captions  
      Action Needed    
    If our ever-diminishing resources are to be conserved
and serious pollution of our environment avoided, then
much more satisfactory management of our waste is needed.
  We need firstly to look at ourselves and curb our own
untidy and wasteful habits and the consumer drive which is
behind such wastefulness.   There must be more to life than
shopping!   We must then look to our political leaders to
give some clear direction for sound waste management, with
some practical initiatives which encourage maximum waste
reduction and reuse, with environmentally sound disposal of
wastes that cannot be reused.  
    Local authorities are in a good position to start
waste reduction and recycling programmes.   A catchy
name for a programme that has been successfully tried overseas
is the "4R Programme" - reduction, recycling, reuse, recovery.
  This would involve: 
&bullet;   Careful analysis of the waste stream to
understand where reduction and reuse can be best
practised.
&bullet;   Careful and hard examination of ways to
reduce waste.
&bullet;   Identifying, publicising and promoting
recycling opportunities.
&bullet;   Promotion and establishment of collection
systems.
&bullet;   Examination of "separation at source
methods", with door-to-door collection of different
recyclables.
&bullet;   Promotion of "waste reduction at source" in
industry through such methods as better housekeeping, process
modification and internal recycling.
&bullet;   Provision of assistance to recycling
industries.
&bullet;   Setting up recycling centres.
&bullet;   Establishing well-managed recycling at
landfills with appropriate receptacles which are clearly
marked.
&bullet;   Setting up programmes in schools both for
education and fundraising reasons.
&bullet;   Production of a recycling handbook which is
updated regularly.
&bullet;   Establishment of a regional waste exchange.
&bullet;   Giving awards for good waste reduction and
reuse initiatives.
&bullet;   Ensuring the region 's local authorities and
the regional authority reduce and recycle their own wastes
responsibly.
&bullet;   Lobbying central government to take much
needed national initiatives such as the imposition of
product charges, and mandatory deposits where appropriate, the
provision of carefully-targeted subsidies and grants, and
provision of advice and encouragement.  
    Only those wastes that cannot be dealt with by the 4Rs
should then be sent for disposal.   This disposal should
be carried out in an environmentally sound fashion.    
  

          Territories      
    Kiwis are territorial birds.   Until recently it was
thought that the male bird staked out the territory and stuck
to it, and the female was attached to him.   It now appears
that females are also capable of holding territories.   In
any border confrontation, however, the male bird of a pair is
more likely to be the combatant than the female.   Recent
studies have shown that brown kiwi territories may
overlap.  
    Territories can vary a lot in size.   On Kapiti
Island, little spotted kiwis are packed into territories about
2ha in area - high-density living.   On the other hand, the
great spotted kiwis of North-west Nelson occupy territories up
to 30ha in area, and the brown kiwis of Hawkes Bay have
established territories as big as 40ha, a huge area for a
flightless bird to patrol, equivalent to about 60 soccer
fields.
  photo  
  caption   
  Kiwis do not avoid steep terrain when establishing their
territories.   They are cross-country specialists, with legs
and feet to handle just about any terrain.   Their claws
serve as crampons, and a short hind toe must be an asset for
descending steep slopes.  
        Burrows      
    A kiwi 's territory is dotted with burrows and shelters
that are used, of course, during daylight hours.   Burrows
are often dug into the earth in the vicinity of a tree 's
roots, which promises easier digging, but they may also be
found in the base of a decaying tree or in the rotted centre
of a fallen log.  
    Kiwis do not climb trees.   They fashion shelters
for roosting at the base of clumps of tall grass or sedge
(typically toetoe and gahnia), fern, bracken, and tussock.
  A thick pile of leaf litter, even radiata pine needles,
may serve as well or a crevice in a jumble of moss-laden rocks
on a stream bank.  
    Great spotted kiwis prefer dens with more than one
entrance/exit.   To achieve this they sometimes construct a
network of tunnels several metres long.   Little spotted
kiwis, on the other hand, invariably occupy burrows with a
single entrance.   The burrows of all species are
surprisingly small yet kiwis manage to squeeze inside them
without undue loss of feathers.   It has been suggested that
in the squeeze the kiwi divests itself of excess water in its
feathers should they be wet.   Certainly a narrow entrance
would help keep the interior warm and dark, and it would
attract less attention.  
    While digging a burrow, the kiwi puts its bill over
its shoulder to get it out of the way, and works its legs and
feet as on a treadmill - but fast.   The dirt flies, and
burrows are built in remarkably short time.  
    The standard burrow is between one and three metres
long, with a chamber at the end large enough for two birds to
sleep side by side.   Bonded birds do not always sleep
together.   Little spotted kiwi pairs sleep together about
50 per cent of the time.  
    When it comes to their accommodation kiwis are thought
to be opportunistic, using vegetation to shelter in where it
is available in the right form and digging burrows when it is
not.   They rotate their use of burrows and shelters.
  Great spotted and brown kiwis seldom use the same one on
consecutive nights, which means they maintain a widespread
presence.   It may pay to advertise.   Intruders may be
discouraged by a high profile, for kiwis leave strong-smelling
faeces where they go, and the birds themselves throw off a
distinctive odour that probably lingers for a few days, if not
for weeks.   It is variously described as earthy (not
surprisingly for a ground-dwelling creature), sweetly musty,
and acrid.  
        Voice      
    From the number and dispersion of their burrows and
shelters, kiwis evidently are on intimate terms with their
territories, although the boundaries are not obvious to the
human eye.   In addition to the intensive foot patrols, it
appears they maintain territorial integrity by calling.
  They also call to keep in touch with their mate.  
    As discussed earlier, kiwis utter a shrill whistle
about two seconds long, repeated up to 20 times.   Males
strike a higher note, which in the case of South Island brown
kiwis rises until right at the end when it abruptly descends.
  The female call is hoarser and it also falls off at the
end.   Little and great spotted kiwis inject a trill or roll
into their call, which rises all the way - 'Crrrruick!'
  The trill is less pronounced in little spotted kiwis.  
    The voice of the kiwi, which the untrained ear may
confuse with that of the weka, is among the loudest in the
forest.   Kiwi calls can carry 200 metres through a dense
subcanopy on a still night and across at least 500 metres of
open country.   Calls are made any time between dusk and
dawn, although they tend to be concentrated in the first few
hours of darkness.   Moonlight seems to inhibit calling, as
does a strong wind.  
    Males call up to three times more often than females,
but it is common for a bonded pair to deliver a duet.   In
the mating season, understandably, kiwis are more vocal.
  In close contact, kiwis may exchange softer, grunted calls
that are thought to be associated with pair reinforcement or
even courtship.  
    Over the years kiwi experts have had fun describing
the various kiwi calls.   Richard Henry, the Resolution
Island ranger, likened the South Island brown kiwi 's call to a
  'high-pitched rather musical scream, with a tremble
and a sudden drop of several notes at the end of each call,
which may be about two seconds duration, repeated five or six
times'  .   Henry thought the call of the little
spotted kiwi was   'just like a guard 's whistle on the
train repeated several times'  .   It was, he said,
  'on the same general plan as the Great Spotted Kiwi,
but very different voices'  .   How different is a
matter of conjecture.   Calls attributed to little spotted
kiwis in the Paparoa Range of the West Coast a few years ago
turned out to be coming from great spotted kiwis.   Brown
kiwi calls are also fairly similar, but distinguishable to the
educated ear.    
    When calling, the kiwi often tips back its head so the
bill is at a slight angle.   At the end of each call brown
kiwis have the habit of dipping the bill suddenly - a rapid
bow.  
    Young kiwis do not attempt the adult call until at
least a year old (perhaps they do not wish to buy a fight with
the territory holder).   The juvenile call is often thin and
punctuated, reminiscent, as one researcher put it, of the
human voice breaking.   As chicks, kiwis have been heard
uttering a chuckle (  '... not unlike that of a
brood-hen when disturbed on her nest,'   said Buller) or
a clicking sound.  
    In addition to their hallmark call kiwis can utter
growling or hissing sounds when alarmed or aggressive.
  Also, they may snap their mandibles to produce a loud
crack.   But the most common sound they make is not strictly
vocal.   It is a loud snuffling that is made when they expel
air forcefully through their nostrils.   This sound is
associated with the kiwi 's specialist sense - smell.  
        Senses      
    The best-known and most spectacular feature of the
kiwi 's physical make-up is its bill, which attains its
greatest length in the female of the Stewart Island brown kiwi
(recorded as long as 20cm, a third of the bird 's overall
length, but more likely to be 16-18cm).  
    The bill is a sensory masterpiece, enabling the kiwi
to locate its food both by   smell   and by touch.
  In the brown kiwis and great spotteds the bill is curved
downward slightly&semi; in little spotted kiwis it is more or less
straight.  
    No other bird in the world is known to have nostrils
at the end of its beak.   Through this adaptation the kiwi
stalks small invertebrate animals as far below the surface as
its bill will reach.   It can bury the bill to the hilt and
still be sniffing, although there are nasal valves present to
prevent soil entering.  
  photo  
  caption  
    The kiwi is among a handful of birds in the world that
depend on the sense of smell to locate food.   In most birds
the sense of smell is considered to be poorly developed, but
the olfactory lobes in the kiwi 's head, which control the
sense of smell, are unusually well developed.  
    In experiments involving a series of dishes, some with
food buried, others without, the kiwi went for the food every
time and all but ignored the soil that contained none.
  These experiments were conducted by an American scientist,
Bernice Wenzel, who reported,   'The   birds'  
performance in the tests of ability to locate food was
completely convincing.'    
    Captive kiwis have been known to refuse to eat their
daily ration if prepared by other than their usual keeper.  
    The bill is undoubtedly as useful an instrument of
  touch   as of smell to the kiwi, which uses it
incessantly to poke and probe in an arc in front of it.
  Said Walter Buller:
      That the sense of touch is highly developed
seems quite certain, because the bird, although it may not be
audibly sniffing, will always first touch an object with the
point of its bill, whether in the act of feeding or of
surveying the ground&semi; and when shut up in a cage or confined
in a room it may be heard, all through the night, tapping
softly at the walls.      
    The whiskers or bristles projecting from the base of
the bill and the forehead are also considered highly sensitive
to touch, helping the bird with its short-range navigation in
the dark and, perhaps, regulating the thrust of the bill while
probing for food.   In the North Island brown kiwi the
whiskers reach out almost as far as the bill.  
    There is the view that kiwis can also feel through
their fluffed-out feathers, which they keep in good condition
by applying oil from the uropygial (preen) gland above the
tail area.   They collect this oil by rubbing their bill up
and down on their nether regions.   In addition to keeping
the feathers glossy and water-proof, the oil is also thought
to be a tonic for the bill.  
    The kiwi 's sense of   hearing   is reckoned to
bc acute.   In all species and sub-species the ear openings
are prominent.   When the kiwi is searching for food it not
only sniffs - it listens as well.   It has been observed
cocking its head while standing perfectly still in the manner
of a blackbird or thrush that is listening out for worms
moving under the ground.  
  photo  
  caption  
    Large ear openings, small eyes: the kiwi 's poor
  eyesight   is legendary, 'like a blind person creeping
about with a bill for a walking stick' is a familiar analogy.
  For its body size the kiwi has small, beady eyes as black
as the forest floor on a moonless night.  
    Logic suggests that the kiwi is compensated for its
poor sight by its powers of smell, touch, and hearing.
  Certainly it does not depend on good vision to feed.
  But in respect of its eyesight the kiwi has had a 'bad
press' over the years.   A pamphlet about the bird,
published in 1951 by the American Kiwi Polish Company,
declared with conviction,   'This completely illogical
bird can see only six feet at night and by daylight much, much
less ... only two feet in front of his elongated
bill.'    
    These days experienced field observers do not believe
the kiwi suffers from an extreme case of myopia.   Even in
the daylight when the bird is supposed to be virtually blind
it will negotiate its way through dense forest at a fast clip
without crashing into anything.   Only in a state of (blind)
panic is the bird liable to hit obstacles.   Disturbed, a
kiwi can run directly to another shelter 100 metres away.
  It knows where it is going.  
    Far from being fazed by daylight, the Stewart Island
brown kiwi is active after daybreak and can be seen feeding in
tussock grasslands and other open country on overcast days.
  But it is the odd one out.   The other four kiwis hide
during the day.   Typically, they emerge from their burrows
and shelters shortly after nightfall, and are active
throughout the night.   Sometimes their last calls mingle
with the  'dawn chorus' of diurnal songbirds.  
    The fifth sense is that of   taste  .   By and
large the kiwi is omnivorous, and its feeding habits deserve
to be examined under a new heading.  
        Feeding      
    Kiwis come out at night to feed, equipped, as one
early writer put it, with their   'combination nose and
worm spear'  .   Worms are indeed a major item in
their diet, and in New Zealand, kiwis have a huge range to
choose from - 178 native species and 14 introduced kinds.
  In capturing worms, kiwis display uncommon dexterity.
  Walter Buller was thoroughly impressed.     'It is
amazing to observe,'   he wrote,   'the extreme
care and deliberation with which the bird draws the worm from
its hiding place, coaxing it out as it were by degrees,
instead of pulling or roughly breaking it.'    
    When searching for food the kiwi is highly mobile,
almost impatient, tapping the ground with its bill and using
its formidable legs and feet, well endowed with claws, to
negotiate the steepest, roughest terrain.  
    Sensing prey, or perhaps detecting an animal 's tunnel,
the kiwi will drive its bill into the earth, right up to the
hilt if necessary.   The tip of the upper mandible overlaps
the lower one, protecting the opening as the bill is pushed
through the soil.   A single probe may not be enough&semi; the
bill may have to go into action as a lever and create a wider
opening in the soil in the shape of a funnel in order to
deepen the search.   Sometimes a kiwi will use its entire
weight to drive the bill deeper by kicking up its legs - a
kiwi 'hand-stand'.  
    H. R. Haeusler, in 1923, amplified Buller 's
description of the kiwi worm-catcher, in this case a North
Island brown:
      When it had formed a funnel-like depression it
inserted its bill and took a good hold for the worm.   With
a steady pull it often succeeded in bringing its victim to the
surface.   When it was not able to do so it ceased pulling,
as to continue to do so would have resulted in tearing the
worm and losing the greater part, and leaning well back
remained in the same position, waiting without the faintest
movement of any part of its body, until the worm, tired out by
its exertion, momentarily relaxed its hold.   Then with
another steady pull generally drew it out of its
burrow.      
  photo  
  caption  
  photo  
  caption  
    Of the foraging habits of the Stewart Island brown
kiwi, H. Guthrie-Smith wrote in 1914:
      I noticed that when looking for them [worms]
on the ground his bill was carried an inch or so above the
litter, and used to feel softly and explore the peat, just as
a blind man uses his staff slantingly to poke and probe the
ground immediately in front of him.      
    William Yate   (An Account of New Zealand,  
1835) advanced the idea that a kiwi could locate worms by
stamping its feet.   He wrote,   'It makes a kind of
hissing noise when in search of prey&semi; and strikes the ground
with its strong heavy feet, to rouse the earth-worms and put
them in motion.'     Buller dismissed the idea as
  'fanciful'  .  
    The preponderance of invertebrates in the kiwi 's diet
probably saves it from needing to drink water too often -
worms and beetle larvae are 85 per cent water.   When it
does drink it immerses its bill and tips back its head,
creating a gurgling sound.  
    Kiwis, primarily carnivorous, eat a wide variety of
small invertebrates including woodlice (slaters), centipedes,
millipedes, slugs, snails, spiders, and various insects.
  Among the insects taken are cicada nymphs, crickets,
wetas, and ants.   The caterpillars and pupae of moths and
larvae and adults of various beetles, especially chafer
beetles, are also favourite prey.  
    Berries and seeds contribute to the diet.   Species
include hinau   (Elaeocarpus dentatus),   miro
  (Prumnopitys ferruginea),   gahnia, and various kinds
of coprosma and hebe.   Miro berries, favourite food of
native pigeons (kereru), smell strongly of turpentine.
  Some leaves are also ingested.   Wildlife Service
scientist Brian Reid, in 1970, concluded that some vegetable
matter was essential for the kiwi 's long-term wellbeing.  
    In Dusky Sound around the turn of the century Richard
Henry noticed that the stomachs of some South Island brown
kiwis that his dog had accidentally killed (the dog lost its
muzzle) were   'full of miro berries, the hard stones of
which they completely digest, probably for the sake of the
little oily kernels'  .   These birds were in good
condition.  
    North Island brown kiwis in Waitangi State Forest
consume bracket fungi and occasionally frogs in addition to
the more common items.   Some of the insects eaten by kiwis
produce repellant secretions and odours unpleasant to the
human nose, but not, it would seem, to the kiwi sense of
smell.   On the contrary, the odours might even help the
kiwi locate the prey.   Waitangi Forest kiwis are partial to
the native black cockroach, kekerengu, which emits an
'objectionable' smell.  
    Freshwater lobsters, measuring about 10cm in length,
are available to kiwis in some areas.   These lobsters live
in streams but are known to climb on to stream banks during
floods when they are liable to be found by kiwis.   Yet
kiwis are thought to 'fish' for prey, and lobsters may be
among the prey species.   Richard Henry guessed that kiwis
found insects and other food in   'puddles and
waterholes'  .   He must have known also that kiwis
can wade - or even swim - across streams and small rivers.  
    Great spotted kiwis in the Saxon River area of
North-west Nelson regularly cross the river, which is the size
of a large, swift stream in this upland zone, to reach feeding
grounds on the red tussock flats insinuating the beech forest,
even when the river is swollen.   These roas seem to feed in
the tussock in winter more often than in summer.   Winter is
the season for beetle and porina moth larvae, which may
explain their greater use of the tussock in that season.  
    On Kapiti Island the diet of the little spotted kiwi
has been closely studied.   Its commonest foods are
earthworms, cranefly larvae and pupae, grass grub beetle
larvae, caterpillars, and spiders.   Plant material in this
kiwi 's diet includes the fruit of hinau, toro   (Myrsine
salicina),   and pigeonwood   (Hedycarya arborea)  
trees.   Grass seed and fern sporangia are also eaten or
accidentally ingested.  
    In addition to using its bill to tap and probe the
ground, this smallest kiwi pushes it obliquely through the
leaf litter somewhat after the style of a duck sifting muddy
vegetation.   Kiwi gizzards usually contain amounts of grit
and small pebbles as digestive aids.   The pebbles can range
in size up to 10mm.  
    The condition of the soil is an important factor in
feeding.   Dry spells produce hard soils, hard going for a
probing bill&semi; a moist climate produces the opposite effect,
hence the kiwi 's interest in rainforest.  
    Until recently it was thought that kiwis were
opportunistic feeders, that they were grateful for what they
could find.   Kapiti Island studies, comparing food
availability to what the kiwis actually eat, are pointing to
another conclusion: that the little spotted kiwi, for one, is
a selective feeder.   It is noticeable, for example, that
these birds do not eat the share of millipedes available to
them.  
    All in all, it is difficult to identify a 'typical'
kiwi diet if only because the birds occupy a very wide habitat
range.   To confuse the picture, captive kiwis prosper on
foods unavailable to them in the wild (see Chapter 8).  
    Feeding and breeding are related.   Kiwis must build
up reserves to get through the breeding season.    
  

        The Unhappy Huka      
  summary  
      H  uka Falls - what New Zealander hasn't
heard of this spectacular waterfall?   The life blood of the
Huka Falls is the water - quantity and quality - that combined
give the cascade which over 500,000 tourists come to see each
year.   The Huka Falls personify the image of unspoilt New
Zealand, with cascades of clear, blue water tumbling into a
haze of swirling white foam.  
    How deep does this image go?   How clean is the
water, how clean should it be?   It would surprise most to
know that treated sewage is discharged a few kilometres
upstream of the falls.
  photo  
  caption  
  Police divers working beneath the falls in 1989
suffered gastric infections.  
    The Taupo Borough Pollution Control Plant (TB-PCP)
discharges secondarily treated sewage into the Waikato River 1
km downstream of the Lake Taupo outlet, about 5 km upstream of
the Huka Falls.  
    Sewage disposal from Taupo prior to the mid 1970s
relied on the use of septic tanks.   Groundwater beneath the
Taupo township had been contaminated by septic tank effluent,
causing increased weed growth and algal slimes in Lake Taupo.
  These nuisance growths added to the impetus to provide the
growing township with a more acceptable means of sewage
disposal.  
    The first stage of the currently existing TB-PCP was
commissioned in 1975 with a discharge permit issued by the
National Pollution Advisory Council.   In the mid 1980s,
reticulation of Taupo was nearly completed, and it became
necessary to increase the plant 's capacity to cope with loads.
  Extensions were completed in 1987 and a five-year water
right was issued by the then Waikato Valley Authority.  
    Sewage is secondarily treated using two high-rate
trickle filters containing stone media, and passes through a
final clarifier before being discharged to the river.   In
perspective, this treatment process is one of the more
advanced in operation in New Zealand, particularly if you
compare it with sewage disposal in our capital city, among
others.  
    So, what happens to the Upper Waikato River when you
discharge treated sewage?  
    The Waikato Valley Authority-Waikato Catchment Board
(now the Waikato Regional Council) has monitored the river for
the duration of the TB-PCP discharge.   Monitoring has
shown that there is little significant change in all water
quality variables between the Lake Taupo outlet and the Huka
Falls, with the exception of bacterial and certain nutrient
components.   The TB-PCP discharge is mostly responsible for
the observed increases, with groundwater and tributary inflows
contributing minor loads.  
    Faecal indicator bacteria increase from near zero at
the Lake Taupo outlet to levels at times above current
criteria for recreational freshwater downstream of the TB-PCP
discharge.   People swim and canoe below the discharge and
the river is used as a water supply for campers.  
    Water leaving Lake Taupo is clear and low in
nutrients - 'oligotrophic', to be exact.   Phosphorus
(P) and nitrogen (N) nutrients are vital to aquatic plant
growth.   Upstream of the discharge P and N sources are
dominated by forms that are largely unavailable for use by
plants.   The TB-PCP discharge is responsible for
increase in available forms of both N and P in the form of
ammonia and phosphate.   About 60 percent of the total
loads of both ammonia and phosphate to the Upper Waikato
River are attributable to the TB-PCP discharge.  
    However, because the river massively dilutes the
effluent, the mean increase in both phosphate and ammonia does
not appear so great&semi; from a mean of 0.6 mg/m  3  
phosphate above to 2.8 mg/m  3       below the
    TB/PCP    TB-PCP     discharge and from 4.1
mg/m  3   ammonia above to 12.0 mg/m  3   below
the TB-PCP discharge.  
    Not huge increases for the river 's plant life to cope
with, you might think.   But plants are primary producers,
and impacts on plants are passed on through the food chain.
  What do these increases mean to river life in
    th    the     Upper Waikato River?  
    Although the water quality of both the effluent and
receiving water was monitored, the biological impact of this
discharge to the Waikato River was not addressed until 1988,
thirteen years after commissioning the discharge.   This is
not unique for discharge impact.   In
  photo  
  caption  
fact, the effects on in situ plant life have seldom been
considered for any discharge into waterways.  
    Conceptually, assessing the biological impact of this
discharge is quite simple.   Plants and animals growing
attached to the riverbed are good indicators of
environmental conditions over time.   By comparing
assemblages present in similar physical habitats both above
and below the discharge, we can assess what changes have come
about as a result of adding effluent to the water.  
    Carrying this concept out in a meaningful and
quantifiable manner is not so simple.   The fast-flowing
Upper Waikato River is on average three to four metres deep,
and can reach 16 metres.  
    Under contract to the Waikato Regional Council, Dr
Brian Coffey and I trialled a rather novel technique: a boat
is used to lay a chain out     acros    across    
the riverbed, the chain is attached to anchors fixed into
either riverbank.   A harnessed scuba diver moves across the
'transit chain' collecting samples and recording data at fixed
intervals.  
    The chain is retrieved after each transect, and the
process repeated elsewhere on the river in relation to
discharge and tributary inflow.   In this manner a
quantifiable picture of the riverbed is built up.
  Transects can be repeated to assess changes in discharge
regimes.  
    These investigations revealed a dramatic change in
plant communities downstream of the TB-PCP discharge with
proliferation of pollution-indicating algae -
  Enteromorpha nana   and   Cladophora
glomerata  .   Growths of these algae smothered and
displaced other aquatic vegetation, significantly
degrading the waterway.  
    But what were these algae responding to?  
    The proliferating algae were supported by the increase
in available N and P nutrients.   The concentration
increases may appear small, but a critical boundary had been
traversed for aquatic plant growth.   But what was
primarily causal - the N or the P increase, or both?  
    Algae growing downstream of the TB-PCP inflow were
transplanted above this discharge and their N and P
responses monitored.   These transplants above the
discharge became nitrogen-deficient, with phosphorus nutrient
supply remaining in excess for algal growth.   This
indicates that the increase in N nutrients from the discharge
is the most likely cause of algal proliferations.  
    This contrasts strongly with overseas studies which
show that P sources are almost
    aways    always     the main cause of these
kinds of changes.   In the Great Lakes, for example, P
increase has been identified as the main cause of
  Cladophora   proliferation.   Phosphorus stripping
has been used with varying levels of success to lessen these
impacts, and has been talked of for the Upper Waikato River.
  As P nutrients were in excess for algal growth even above
the discharge, stripping phosphorus from the effluent is
unlikely to reduce algal growth.   And because the
increase in nutrient concentrations is in any case relatively
small, any nutrient stripping technique used would need to be
very finely tuned - maybe over 90 percent effective.  
    In essence, it appears that the Upper Waikato River is
extremely sensitive to changes in nutrient regimes.
  Discharging secondarily treated sewage into the river,
therefore, is not compatible with maintaining downstream water
quality.  
    Speaking of downstream values, modelling work
carried out in this study concluded that the Upper Waikato
River was a 'transporter' rather than a 'processor' of the
effluent.   Most of the nutrient load from the TB-PCP
discharge ends up downstream of the Huka Falls, where its
impact has not been addressed.  
    This story may have a happy ending.   The work
described here forms part of the draft Upper Waikato River
Management Plan, formulated by the Waikato Regional Council.
  This plan recognises the value of diversion of the TB-PCP
discharge to land-based treatment.   It is open for public
comment until October.   So what do you think the end of the
story should be?  
    And how many other stories need to be told for
discharges into New Zealand 's waterways?    
          Giardia - One Swallow Could Make Your
Summer      
  summary  
      H  alf a million New Zealanders may be at
risk from the nasty protozoal parasite called giardia,
according to a recent Health Department review.   This
does not mean they will necessarily catch giardiasis, the
unpleasant gastrointestinal disease caused by the giardia
protozoa.   Rather, it is a 'high' estimate of the number of
people who draw drinking water from upland catchments,
rivers, streams, shallow
  photo  
  caption  
wells, springs, lakes and roofs.  
    Chlorination alone, at least as it is used in many New
Zealand water supplies, will not kill giardia, the review
says.   Higher doses of chlorine and longer contact, backed
by good system inspection and monitoring, are effective
but can result in unpleasant tastes.  
    Recent surveys have identified giardia in more than 12
water supplies, including Oamaru, Kakanui, the townships of
Tikorangi and Urenui in northern Taranaki, and in the Hutt
River and head-waters of Wellington 's supply area.
  Department of Conservation recreation officer Jeff Ainge
says that testing in national and forest parks has confirmed
the presence of giardia in several high-use areas, such as
Abel Tasman National Park.  
    However, he says, New Zealand did not have the ability
to test for giardia in waterways until about two years ago,
and its presence in rivers and streams is nothing new.
    "And we don't know whether the incidence or
concentration is increasing or not,"   he adds.  
    No one knows how many cases of giardiasis there are in
New Zealand.   An estimate was made for the first time in
1990 by the New Zealand Communicable Disease Centre in
Porirua.   By surveying medical laboratories, they came up
with the figure of 3356 cases.  
    However, centre research assistant Natalie Walker says
that figure is certain to be a significant underestimate,
because the disease is not notifiable and many people might
not have acute enough symptoms to go to the doctor.
  Although there have been no major outbreaks such as
occurred in Aspen, Colorado in 1965,   "we have no idea
how many more cases there are.     We can't even say if
it 's increasing because we 've only been looking for it for a
couple of years.  "    
    Department of Health environmental scientist Chris
Shaw, co-author of the review, says there is no need for
panic, although care needs to be taken.     "  We
have to assume that all waterways, including source waters
for community water supplies, are at risk.   However,
giardia has almost certainly been here for some time.   It
was just that 25 years ago people didn't look for
it."      
    Professor Tim Brown, in charge of giardia research at
Massey University, was quoted last year as saying that concern
about giardia borders on paranoia.   He compared the concern
to publicity several years ago about his research into
amoebic meningitis in hot pools.     "  We were
closing pools because it actually kills, but people still
climbed over the fences for a swim.   Mention giardia, which
is not life-threatening, and everyone is
paranoid."      
    Although water-borne infection is the main source of
the disease in many countries, Chris Shaw says that in New
Zealand person-to-person contact is probably more
important.   Around a third of the 3356 cases estimated
in the survey came from the Auckland area, where there is full
water treatment which removes giardia.     "  We
have to ask: are people going out of the area and catching it
or is it person-to-person infection based on poor hygiene?
    "  Beavers have it in the USA - it is called
'beaver fever' there - and they live and defecate in the
water.   In New Zealand faeces containing cysts have to be
washed into the water (although rats may defecate in water),
so the risks of water-borne infection are less here than in
the USA or Canada."       It has been estimated
that a minimum of 10 cysts are needed to infect a person, and
some stream water tested in New Zealand showed around 10 cysts
per 100 litres.     "Therefore you 'd be unlucky to
catch it by drinking water in the bush,"   Shaw
said.  
    The New Plymouth District Council recently issued
warnings for people to boil their drinking water after giardia
was found in the Tikorangi school drinking-water system and in
the Urenui water supply.   Council public health engineer
Anthony Wilson said the warnings were precautions only.
    "  Tikorangi seemed odd in that it was a
groundwater supply, which you wouldn't expect to be
  diagram  
contaminated.   In fact we found the contamination was
coming from possum droppings on top of the school tank.   In
Urenui there was a very old water supply system that came to
us after local body amalgamation.   It was not running
properly and the local people were complaining about the
water.   We found just one cyst there and tests since have
all been negative."      
    Anthony Wilson points out a problem with testing water
for giardia is that the tests indicate the presence of cysts
but not whether they are dead or alive.   Equally, because
giardia does not breed in water, a lack of cysts does not
necessarily mean giardia is not present.  
    Cysts have also been found in low numbers in catchment
streams above Wellington 's water supply.   However,
Wellington Regional Council laboratory manager Helen
Sillars says Wellington 's water treatment removes giardia
cysts.   Giardia cysts are also known to be in the lower
Hutt River, which she says is probably related to a small
sewerage plant near Trentham.   Giardia has been found in
sewerage plants overseas, and most are likely to have giardia
in their effluent.  
    Giardiasis was first detected in New Zealand among
servicemen returning from overseas in the 1940s.   Whether
it spread from this introduction or was here before is
unknown.   As more New Zealanders have travelled
overseas, many may have encountered the disease and
brought it back as a souvenir.   As more people from here
and abroad go into the outdoors, there is also greater
pressure on limited outdoor toilets, perhaps contaminating
drinking water.  
      Very little is known about giardia in New Zealand,
although Chris Shaw says the best bet is that people have been
catching it for decades.   Studies funded by the Health
Department last year have isolated   Giardia lamblia  ,
the giardia species which infects humans, and produced
giardia cysts   in vitro  , both essential for
improving water testing.   Other studies implicate household
pets: 25 percent of dogs and seven percent of cats tested in
Hamilton were 
  box  
carrying strains which could infect humans.   Giardia was
found in possums, rats, sheep, cows and hens, though in
numbers too small to be statistically significant.  
    The Massey University department of microbiology and
genetics recently started a three-year project in the
Manawatu-Wanganui Area Health Board district, again funded by
the Health Department, to get hard data on giardia and
giardiasis.   The study will monitor waterways, check farm,
domestic and wild animals for cysts, develop better human
testing procedures, and survey a target human population for
giardia infections.  
      A  nother pathogenic protozoa,
  Cryptosporidium  , may turn out to be a greater public
health risk than giardia.   In a recent article Dr Martin
Tobias, manager of the New Zealand Communicable Disease
Centre, said it may be more prevalent here than was
thought, and it appears to be high in farm and possibly feral
animals.     "As it is self-limiting and generally
mild, the absence of any effective treatment for
cryptosporidiosis is not a major concern in the
immunocompetent person.   The same is not true in the
immunocompromised (particularly persons with Aids),
however, in whom the disease is often fatal."    
    The New Zealand standards for drinking water are based
on World Health Organisation water quality guidelines,
under which pathogenic protozoa such as giardia should not be
present.   The Health Department review suggests a rough
estimate of the cost of upgrading water-treatment plants in
New Zealand to remove giardia - and cryptosporidium - is
$60-$100m.   The Government is unlikely to welcome
popular demand for upgraded water supplies at this time of
national penny-pinching, and a gradual improvement is probably
the best hope.   Since the risk of developing giardiasis
from drinking water in most situations is small, the upgrading
need only be gradual.  
    Trampers, hunters and other users of the outdoors
should be aware of the problem and use toilets where available
to prevent spread of giardia.   Otherwise they should do
what Scouts and Guides have always done - choose a spot well
away from water, walking tracks and possible campsites, dig a
shallow hole and refill with soil after use.   Some trampers
carry filters now.   Many soldier on, swearing they 'll drink
the water until they get sick.  
    Chris Shaw says the spread of giardia is an
unfortunate fact of life in New Zealand in the latter part of
the 20th century.     "In the UK no one would dream of
drinking out of a river.   You know there would be a dead
animal or something like it just around the corner.   Sadly,
New Zealand is just catching up with the rest of the
world."       